Intraocular pressure in genetically distinct mice: an update and strain survey

Abstract

Background

Little is known about genetic factors affecting intraocular pressure (IOP) in mice and other mammals. The purpose of this study was to determine the IOPs of genetically distinct mouse strains, assess the effects of factors such as age, sex and time of day on IOP in specific strain backgrounds, and to assess the effects of specific candidate gene mutations on IOP.

Results

Based on over 30 studied mouse strains, average IOP ranges from approximately 10 to 20 mmHg. Gender does not typically affect IOP and aging results in an IOP decrease in some strains. Most tested strains exhibit a diurnal rhythm with IOP being the highest during the dark period of the day. Homozygosity for a null allele of the carbonic anhydrase II gene (Car2n) does not alter IOP while homozygosity for a mutation in the leptin receptor gene (Leprdb) that causes obesity and diabetes results in increased IOP. Albino C57BL/6J mice homozygous for a tyrosinase mutation (Tyrc-2J) have higher IOPs than their pigmented counterparts.

Conclusions

Genetically distinct mouse strains housed in the same environment have a broad range of IOPs. These IOP differences are likely due to interstrain genetic differences that create a powerful resource for studying the regulation of IOP. Age, time of day, obesity and diabetes have effects on mouse IOP similar to those in humans and other species. Mutations in two of the assessed candidate genes (Lepr and Tyr) result in increased IOP. These studies demonstrate that mice are a practical and powerful experimental system to study the genetics of IOP regulation and disease processes that raise IOP to harmful levels.

Background

Glaucoma is a leading cause of blindness but its molecular etiology is poorly understood. Glaucoma involves retinal ganglion cell death and optic nerve damage that is often associated with elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) [1-5].

It is becoming increasingly clear that many forms of glaucoma have a genetic component [6,7], and much current research is focused on identifying chromosomal regions and genes that contribute to glaucoma [8-10]. Identifying such loci allows screening for individuals with an increased risk of developing glaucoma [11]. Identifying genes contributing to elevated IOP and glaucoma is only the first step, however, and animal models will provide systems for subsequent hypothesis testing and experimental dissection of pathogenesis.

Due to conservation in mammalian physiology and the powerful tools of mouse genetics, mice are a very important experimental system for probing the functions (both in health and disease) of many genes recently identified by sequencing the human genome [12]. We have focused on developing the mouse system for IOP and glaucoma studies [13-19]. Mice are expected to be extremely helpful in characterizing genes and mechanisms that affect IOP or the susceptibility of the optic nerve and retina to glaucomatous damage [20].

Very little is known about the magnitude of IOP of various mouse strains or IOP fluctuation in mice with time or other factors. Previously, we developed a method to measure IOP in mice and reported initial findings on the magnitude of mouse IOP [13]. The procedure involves direct measurement of pressure following cannulation of the anterior chamber. The initial experiments demonstrated that in our hands careful ocular cannulation has a very minor effect on IOP (average of -0.3 mmHg, mode -0.5 mmHg) and demonstrated significant differences in intraocular pressure levels between four mouse strains. Here, we provide an update, including an extensive strain survey, and show that the methodology is reliable and produces reproducible data over extended periods of time.

Results

A broad range of IOPs between strains

Figure 1 shows the average IOP of a number of inbred mouse strains that were housed in the same environmental conditions. There is a wide range of IOP with strain BALB/cJ having one of the lowest average IOPs (11.1 ± 0.5 mmHg) and strain CBA/CaJ one of the highest IOPs (19.3 ± 0.3 mmHg). Significant differences exist among various strains (P < 0.0001 for all groups, ANOVA comparing strains within each sex group).

Figure 1

An almost two-fold range of IOP between genetically distinct mouse strains. Mean IOP ± SEM is shown for each strain. Twelve to 25 mice were analyzed for each strain (typically 18 to 20), except for RIIIS/J (7 mice). Mice of most strains were 6 to 12 months old, except for SEC/1ReJ and SB/Le that were 2 to 3 months old. Approximately half of the CE/J and one third of the BUB/BnJ mice were 16 months old and were pooled with the younger mice, as the IOPs of both ages were the same. Strain name CBA/CaHN-Btkxid/J is abbreviated to CBA/CaHN.

Clinical and histological analysis of the eyes of all studied strains (see Table 1) did not identify anatomic or pathologic features that might account for the differences in IOP. For example, the iridocorneal angle and aqueous humor drainage structures are open to the anterior chamber and have normal morphology in both BALB/cJ and CBA/CaJ mice (Figure 2). More than 20% of CBA/CaJ mice had IOPs of over 21 mmHg, which increases risk for glaucoma in humans. We aged a small group of these mice (n = 4) to 2 years and histologically analyzed their optic nerves and retinas but they did not develop glaucoma.

Figure 2

Normal iridocorneal angles in strains with high and low IOP. The iridocorneal angle that contains the aqueous humor drainage structures (Schlemm's canal (SC) and trabecular meshwork (TM) had a normal morphology in strains CBA/CaJ (A, high IOP), BALB/cJ (B, low IOP) and all other strains. Pigment filled macrophages that resemble human clump cells were often located in the angle of CBA/CaJ mice but were never sufficient to block drainage. We have observed similar quantities of these cells at this location in other strains with lower IOP. The angle recess between the cornea (C) and iris root (I) was open and not occluded. Aqueous humor passes through this recess before entering the drainage structures. Original Magnification 630X.

Table 1

Ocular abnormalities in various strains

All strains shown in Figure 1 were evaluated but only strains with abnormalities are shown. For incidence, the numerator indicates the number of mice or eyes affected and the denominator indicates the total number analyzed. The mice were 6 to 12 months old at the time of analysis and were not studied at other ages unless indicated. Histological analysis confirmed these observations and also identified calcified cyst like structures in the iris epithelium of strains SB/Le and SEC/1ReJ. A low incidence of corneal scarring was noted in some strains and likely resulted from a scratched cornea. Previously described retinal degeneration [[81]] caused by homozygosity for the Pde6brd1mutation was noted in strains SB/Le, ST/bJ, BUB/BnJ, CBA/J, C3H/HeJ, SJL/J and SWR/J.

Strain differences are reproducible

To assess the consistency of IOP in specific strains, we measured IOP in different cohorts of each strain maintained under similar conditions at different times. We purposefully included strains at each end of the IOP spectrum, and strain C57BL/6J (B6) that is commonly used for genetic experiments (Figure 3). The average IOP of different cohorts of strains CBA/CaJ, CBA/CaHN (both high end of spectrum) and B6 were consistent over time. This was true of most strains assessed on multiple occasions. Average IOP for age matched mice of the same strain assessed at different times typically differed by no more than 1.5 mmHg, and the differences were usually smaller. Strain 129P3/J was the most variable strain with the average IOP fluctuating by up to 2.5 mmHg.

Figure 3

The IOPs of different strains are stable and reproducible over time. Mean IOP ± SEM is shown for the indicated strain at different times of measurement. The measurement times within a single year were separated by a few months. The IOPs of strains that were analyzed multiple times in the same year are listed in the chronological order that they were obtained with the earliest measurement on left. The sex [Male (M) or Female (F)], age (months), and number of mice (n) analyzed for the CBA strains are listed starting with the earliest measurement and ending with the latest: CBA/CaJ, F, n = 22, age 6–7; M, n = 11, age 2; CBA/CaHN, F, n = 16, age 3; M, n = 8, age 3. For BALB/cJ and C57BL/6J, all groups were male and primarily 3 to 4 months old. The number of mice analyzed at each time follows: BALB/cJ 8, 10, 11, 15, 18 and 14, C57BL/6J 10, 14, 21,40,40 and 42. Strain name CBA/CaHN-Btkxid/J is abbreviated to CBA/CaHN.

Despite the general consistency of IOP, the average IOPs of some strains have changed in a reproducible manner. The IOPs of BALB/cJ mice (low end of spectrum) were very similar for the past several years, around 11 mmHg. Between early 1996 and 1997, however, the IOP of this strain did jump from approximately 7.7 mmHg to approximately 11 mmHg (Figure 3). During this period, the room in which our animals were housed and the manufacturer of the mouse diet were changed. Over the same period, the IOP of A/J also increased dramatically, from 9.4 ± 0.5 mmHg (n = 11) in 1996 to 14.2 ± 0.4 mmHg (n = 19) in 1997. The increased IOP in A/J also was reproducible, with the average IOP of mice assessed in the year 2000 being 14.5 ± 0.4 mmHg (n = 16). Importantly, the IOPs of strains B6 and C3H/HeJ did not change during this time (B6, 12.3. ± 0.5 mmHg in 1996 and 12.4 ± 0.3 mmHg in 1997, n= 10 and 14; C3H/HeJ, 13.7 ± 0.8 mmHg in 1996 and 13.6 ± 0.2 mmHg in 1997, n = 9 and 19).

Effect of age on IOP

We focused on the commonly used B6, 129P3/J and C3H/HeJ strains to determine the effects of age on IOP (Figure 4). In B6, age had a significant effect on IOP (P < 0.001). IOP was slightly decreased at both 12 months (12.2 ± 0.2 mmHg) and 19 months (12.2 ± 0.3 mmHg) compared to 3 months (13.1 ± 0.3 mmHg) and 7 months (13.3 ± 0.3 mmHg). Although the decrease was of a similar level to the variation observed in 3 month old mice (see Figure 3), the IOPs of control young mice (see Methods) analyzed at the same times as the various B6 age groups did not decrease. For example, control mice analyzed at the same time as the 3 month, 12 month and 18 month B6 age groups had IOPs of 13.0 ± 0.2 mmHg (n = 14), 13.3 ± 0.2 mmHg (n = 14), 13.7 ± 0.4 mmHg (n = 12), respectively. IOP was even lower in the 24 month B6 mice (10.8 ± 0.4 mmHg), and again the average IOP of young controls measured at the same time was not changed (13.5 ± 0.2, n = 12).

Figure 4

IOP changes with increasing Age.  Mean IOP ± SEM is shown for the indicated strain at different ages. IOP decreased significantly in strains C57BL/6J and 129P3/J but not C3H/HeJ. The C57BL/6J and 129P3/J groups consisted of approximately equal numbers of males and females. The 3 months old C3H/HeJ mice were male while the other ages were composed of males and females. The number of mice analyzed at each age, listed from youngest to oldest, follow: C57BL/6J, 18, 18, 18, 18, 13; 129P3/J, 18, 15, 16, 14, 21; C3H/HeJ, 15, 23 17 and 16.

In strain 129P3/J, IOP did not differ significantly with age between 3 and 14 months but was lower in 18 month old mice (P < 0.001 compared to all younger ages, Figure 4). Despite a 1 mmHg dip in IOP at 8 months, there were no significant IOP differences between C3H/HeJ mice at each age tested (P = 0.2 for age). Although the effect of age has not been thoroughly assessed in other strains, no obvious age-related differences have been identified in other strains analyzed at multiple ages except for the glaucomatous DBA/2J and AKXD-28/Ty strains [14,19].

Effect of sex on IOP

Although we have not rigorously assessed the effect of sex on IOP in many strains, sex specific differences have not been detected in the majority of strains for which both sexes have been analyzed, and have proven inconsistent even within an individual strain analyzed multiple times. Strains B6 and 129P3/J have been extensively evaluated at multiple ages between 3 and 24 months of age. Sex differences were always absent in strain 129P3/J and typically absent in strain B6. In strain B6, however, males infrequently had significantly higher IOP than females. For example, in one experiment, B6 males had an average IOP of 14.2 ± 0.3 mmHg (n = 12) whereas the average IOP of females was 13.1 ± 0.3 mmHg (n = 12, P = 0.01). If real, this sporadic sex difference was not dependent on age, sometimes occurring in a group of B6 mice at a particular age and sometimes not occurring in a separate group of the same age.

Anesthesia protocol avoids IOP alteration and allows detection of diurnal differences

All IOPs were assessed using an anesthetic regime of 99 mg/kg ketamine and 9 mg/kg xylazine (defined as 1X). Initial experiments suggested that an almost identical dose (100 mg/kg ketamine and 9 mg/kg xylazine) of anesthesia had no effect on IOP during the experimental period with IOP being measured as soon as possible after the mouse was unconscious, typically minutes. [13]. To further assess the effects of anesthesia, we measured IOP in groups of genetically identical B6 mice subjected to different doses (1X, 1.5X and 2X) at 5 and 25 minutes after administration (Figure 5). For all doses, IOP decreased by 25 minutes (P = 0.005 for time). The greater the dose the greater the decrease in IOP. At the 5 minute measurement, however, IOP was the same using all doses suggesting that the anesthetic effect on IOP had not yet occurred. To identify any early window when it may be possible to assess IOP without an obvious anesthetic effect, 195 mice of strain B6 were anesthetized with the 1X dose and IOP was measured at 1 minute time points between 4 and 12 minutes after administration (Figure 5). The mean IOP of groups analyzed at each time point did not differ (P = 0.9) indicating that the IOP depressing effect of anesthesia occurs later than 12 minutes after administration. Similar results were obtained using 161 strain 129P3/J and 145 strain DBA/2J mice with the 1X dose (129P3/J, P = 0.1; DBA/2J, P = 0.2). In support of a later effect of anesthesia (since general anesthesia is reported to mask diurnal variation in IOP [21]), we identified increased IOP during the dark compared to the light period of the day in several tested strains (Figure 6). In these experiments, IOP measurements were made between 5 and 12 minutes after administration of anesthesia.

Figure 5

No effect of 1X anesthetic dose within 12 minutes of administration. A Mean IOP ± SD is shown for C57BL/6J mice at 5 and 25 minutes after administration of various doses of anesthetic. The 1X dose consisted of 99 mg/kg ketamine and 9 mg/kg xylazine. All doses decreased IOP by 25 minutes. At all doses the IOP at 5 minutes was the same suggesting that the effect of anesthesia had not yet occurred. Approximately thirty 3 to 4 month old mice were analyzed at each dose and time B-D. Scatter-plots demonstrating no change in IOP over the 12 minutes following anesthetic administration in three relatively unrelated mouse strains. All strains consisted of males and females that ranged from 3 to 6 months of age. The sexes and ages were equally represented at each time point. The scatter-plots include 195 C57BL/6J, 161 129P3/J and 145 DBA/2J mice.

Figure 6

IOP is increased during the dark compared to light periods in several strains.  Mean IOP ± SEM is shown for the indicated strains at measurement during the light (open bars) or dark (filled bars) periods of the day. All mice were 2 to 4 months old except for CBA/CaJ that were 5 to 6 months old. 129B6 refers to mice of a mixed 129X1/SvJ and C57BL/6J background. IOP was increased during the dark in all strains except CBA/CaJ. The number of mice successfully analyzed during the light (L) or dark (D) periods follows, DBA/2J 10L,10D; C57BL/6J 32L, 22D; C57BR/cdJ 12L,10D; SWR/J 16L, 16D; BALB/cByJ 15L, 16D; 129B6 10L, 12D; CBA/CaJ 22L, 16D.

Blood pressure does not correlate with IOP

An initial study of the relationship between blood pressure and IOP in mice did not detect a good correlation (R2 = 0.1, Figure 7).

Figure 7

No correlation between blood pressure and IOP.  There is no strong correlation between the average systolic blood pressure of each strain and the average IOP of that strain (R2 = 0.1). All mice were female and 2 to 4 months old, with the exception that the female CBA/CaJ used for IOP assessment were 6 to 7 months old. If the CBA/CaJ mice are excluded, R2 drops to 0.01 of ARK/J, C57BL/6J and SJL/J, strain ARK/J had the lowest IOP.

Myoc alleles do not associate with the magnitude of IOP

Mutations in the myocilin gene (MYOC) cause human glaucoma. To determine if allelic variation in the mouse Myoc gene associated with IOP in mouse strains, we analyzed the gene in an assortment of strains with different IOPs. Two alleles were identified. One of these alleles had a 12 nucleotide insertion in the promoter region (ccagagcagggt, between positions -340 and -341) compared to the previously published sequence and is called the insertion allele. The other allele was identical to the published sequence [22]. The insertion allele also had a previously reported substitution (A to G, Thr164Ala) in exon 1 and several other single base changes in the promoter region [22]. The presence or absence of this allele does not associate with IOP as it is present in strains with a range of IOPs (Figure 8).

Figure 8

Myoc alleles do not associate with IOP.  Sequencing identified two alleles of Myoc in these mouse strains (see text). Mouse strains homozygous for an allele having a 12 bp insertion in the promoter region are shown as open bars and strains homozygous for the allele without this insertion have filled bars. The IOP data is the same as that in Figure 1.

Genetic alterations and IOP

Y Chromosome

The Y chromosome has been implicated in strain specific blood pressure differences in rats [23,24]. To test if the Y chromosome of strain 129/Ola alters IOP in relation to that of strain B6, we compared the IOPs of pure B6 males and consomic B6 males that had the 129P2/Ola Y chromosome (backcrossed for 11 generations). No differences in IOP were detected between these groups of mice (Figure 9, P = 0.1).

Figure 9

Effects of genetic alterations.  Mean IOP ± SEM is shown. There is no difference in IOP between 3 to 4 month old males with either the 129P2/Ola (n = 18) or C57BL/6J (n = 20) Y chromosome (Y Chr). The 129 Y Chr had been backcrossed to strain C57BL/6J for 11 generations. Similarly, 6 to 9 month old males and females that are homozygous for normal (+) or mutant (n) alleles of Car2 have similar IOPs (n = 18 and 14, respectively). However, 4 months old males homozygous for the Lepr diabetes and obesity causing mutation (db) had significantly higher IOPs than their heterozygous age and sex matched littermates. The average body weight of the homozygotes and heterozygotes was 59 g (range 50 to 64 g) and 35 g (range 28 to 41 g) respectively. Blood sugar levels in db /db males of this age are almost always in the diabetic range whereas those of heterozygotes are not [[27]]. This was recently confirmed in cohorts of approximately 25 males of each genotype (mean ± SD; db/db 422 ± 110 mg/dl ; db/+ 147 ± 19 mg/dl; Anthony Nicholson, The Jackson Laboratory, personal communication)

Car2

To test if deficiency of carbonic anhydrase II leads to decreased IOP, we analyzed mice of a B6 background that were genetically similar but with normal or mutant alleles of the Car2 gene [25,26]. There was no difference in IOP between normal and mutant mice (Figure 9, P = 0.5).

Lepr

To test if genetic perturbations that cause obesity and diabetes can alter IOP, we compared mice that were genetically similar but were either homozygous or heterozygous for a leptin receptor mutation (db) that results in obesity and diabetes before 4 months of age on the C57BLKS/J strain background used [27]. IOP was modestly but significantly elevated in obese, diabetic homozygous mutants (14.7 ± 0.3 mmHg) compared to non-obese, non-diabetic heterozygotes (13.4 ± 0.4 mmHg, P < 0.01, Figure 9).

Tyr

To determine if albinism alters IOP, we analyzed B6 mice that were either pigmented or albino. The albino mice were homozygous and coisogenic for a mutant allele of tyrosinase (Tyrc-2J) that arose on the otherwise pigmented B6 background. In 2 month old mice, homozygosity for Tyrc-2J resulted in increased IOP (14.2 ± 0.4 mmHg) compared to wild type, pigmented mice (12.4 ± 0.3 mmHg, P < 0.0001). The same was true for independent cohorts of mice of different ages that were analyzed at different times (Figure 10A). In contrast to pigmented B6 mice (Figure 6), the IOPs of the albino B6 mice were not increased at measurement during the dark compared to light period of the day (P = 0.6, Figure 10B).

Figure 10

Tyr mutation results in increased IOP and altered diurnal changes A. Different cohorts of C57BL/6J mice that are homozygous for the spontaneous Tyrc-2J mutation have higher IOP than their normal counterparts at all tested ages. All groups consisted of male and female mice. B. IOP is not increased during the dark period of the day in Tyrc-2J homozygotes. The number of mice analyzed during the light period were: 2 month, 28 +/+, 29 c-2J/c-2J, 4 month, 20 +/+ and 20 c-2J/c-2J, 8 month, 15 +/+ and 15 c-2J/c-2J. Fourteen mice of each genotype were successfully analyzed during the dark period of the day.

Discussion

IOP differences are reproducible and amenable to genetic analyses

We report the IOPs of over 30 genetically different mouse strains that were housed in the same environmental conditions. The magnitude of IOP differences between strains and the good reproducibility of readings over time will allow the use of genetic approaches to identify genes that underlie these differences. Using our method, a trained investigator can measure the IOPs of 10 mice in an hour. Thus it is feasible to assess sufficient numbers of mice for quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis methods and to use these methods to identify chromosomal regions contributing to strain differences in IOP. The strain survey we report provides valuable information for designing these experiments. The throughput and reproducibility also is sufficient for mutagenesis screens [28-30]. These are important approaches as they may allow the association of genes with IOP and glaucoma whose currently known functions do not suggest that they affect aqueous humor dynamics or do not immediately identify them as likely glaucoma candidates.

No effect of anesthetic protocol on IOP during a 12 minute measurement window

Many anesthetic agents including xylazine lower IOP. Ketamine usually appears to increase IOP [31-33], but there are reports of ketamine having no effect on IOP or even reducing IOP [31,34]. Different doses, species used, routes of administration or environments may contribute to these differences. The relationship between the IOPs we measure and those in conscious mice depends upon the effect of our anesthetic protocol (intraperitoneal injection of 99 mg/kg ketamine and 9 mg/kg xylazine). An anesthetic effect could potentially alter IOP and mask genetically determined differences in IOP. Therefore, it is very important to understand this effect. Here, we show that, despite a depressant effect on IOP by 25 minutes, our anesthetic protocol has no detectable effect on IOP during the first 12 minutes after administration. Thus, to avoid effects of anesthesia on IOP, all measurements should be made within a window of up to 12 minutes after anesthetic administration.

Similarities and differences to rat studies

Our results agree with the time course of cardiovascular depression caused by intraperitoneal administration of ketamine and xylazine in rats. In that study, anesthesia had a minor effect on blood pressure during the first 15 minutes following injection but a strong hypotensive effect between 15 and 30 minutes that continued for more than an hour [35]. In contrast, intraperitoneally administered ketamine (100 mg/kg) was shown to rapidly decrease IOP in a different rat study [36]. IOP decreased significantly between a conscious measurement and the first possible measurement under anesthesia (defined as time 0). IOP decreased further by the next reading (at 5 minutes) after which it remained stable for the duration of the experiment (20 minutes)[36]. The time 0 measurement in that study was at a very similar state of anesthesia as our 4 and 5 minute time points (starting as soon as possible and within 20 to 60 seconds of adequate anesthesia), and the 5 minute rat time point was similar to our 9 and 10 minute measurement times. Thus, although both rat and mouse studies show that anesthesia decreases IOP, the studies do not agree on the timing of the effect. The IOP depression occurred very soon after anesthesia in the rats but was delayed in the mice.

Environment may influence the effect of anesthesia

Factors that may influence the effect of anesthesia include the species, strain and environment used. Essentially the same dose of ketamine and route of administration was used in both the rat and mouse IOP studies. In mice, the strain does not appear to be important as no early effect of anesthesia was present in the three distantly related laboratory strains [37] we studied in detail, and we have not observed any obvious effect during this period in any analyzed strain. Environmental differences may be important. Cage cleanliness, changing frequency and housing density can alter drug metabolism and the effect of anesthesia in rats [38,39]. The type of bedding used also may be important. We use wood shavings for bedding and wood shavings expose the mice to terpenes. Terpene administration or environmental exposure to terpenes in wood shavings alters drug resistance and decreases the effect of anesthetic agents in both rats and mice [40-45].

Risk factors for increased IOP

Some epidemiological studies implicate factors such as diabetes, vascular hypertension, arterial hypotension, vasospasm, aberrant autoregulation of blood flow and sex in glaucoma. Other studies find no association between these factors and glaucoma [2,46-48]. Similarly, the effects of various factors including age, gender, blood pressure, obesity and diabetes have been variably associated with elevated IOP. We evaluated the relationship between these latter factors and IOP in genetically homogeneous mouse strains in a controlled environment.

Age

Although within the range of variability observed in young mice, the IOP of B6 mice modestly decreased around 1 year of age. This decrease was statistically significant compared to young mice measured at the same time. At 2 years of age the IOP of B6 mice had decreased further, though an effect of anesthesia in these very old mice cannot be ruled out [49]. The IOP of 129P3/J mice also decreased with age but only at the oldest age examined (18 months). Decreasing IOP correlates with increasing age in the human Japanese population [50,51]. Further studies of B6 mice may allow experimental investigation of this effect. Additional studies may also identify " normal" mouse strains that develop increased IOP with age as generally occurs in Western populations [52,53]. We previously demonstrated that the glaucomatous strains DBA/2J and AKXD-28/Ty develop elevated IOP with age [14,19].

Gender

In the examined strains, we found no consistent differences in IOP between males and females. This was true at all ages for the 3 strains that were aged to 18 months or older. This is in agreement with a number of human studies, which show that IOP is equal between the sexes [52,53]. However, some studies have found sex-specific differences (typically with higher IOP in females and the magnitude of the difference increasing after 40 years of age) [53,54]. Of possible relevance, we previously reported that female mice of strains DBA/2J and AKXD-28/Ty develop elevated IOP at an earlier age than males [14,19].

Blood pressure

Some but not all human studies have reported a positive association between IOP and blood pressure [48,52]. Our comparison of the relationship between blood pressure and IOP in young, adult female mice of different mouse strains, whose blood pressures differed up to 36 mmHg, did not reveal a positive correlation. Further studies are needed to determine if blood pressure correlates with IOP in males, and to determine the relationship between blood pressure and IOP in various mouse strains with age.

Obesity and diabetes

Obesity or higher body mass index have been implicated by some but not other studies as risk factors for increased IOP and glaucoma [51,55-57]. Similarly, diabetes or the combination of diabetes and obesity have been variably associated with elevated IOP and glaucoma [46,52,58-62]. To test if genetic perturbations that cause obesity and diabetes can alter IOP, we compared groups of mice that were genetically similar except that they were either homozygous or heterozygous for a leptin receptor mutation (db) that results in early onset obesity and diabetes. The obese, diabetic mice had higher IOPs than their lean, non-diabetic littermates. Thus, epidemiological associations between increased IOP and obesity or diabetes are supported by this work and appear to be functionally relevant. Further experiments with obese non-diabetic or diabetic non-obese mice will help to characterize the separate effects of these risk factors.

IOP is increased during the dark period of the day

Diurnal variation in IOP is common in humans and laboratory animals [53]. The molecular mechanisms underlying the diurnal rhythm are not defined but increased aqueous humor production or flow occurs during the period of increased IOP in both rabbits and humans [63-65]. Small changes in the resistance to aqueous humor drainage may also contribute to diurnal differences in IOP [66,67]. We first suspected IOP changes with time of day when the IOP of a group of B6 mice measured in the hour prior to onset of the dark period appeared to be higher than at other times of day. Previously, a rise of IOP was reported to occur before onset of the dark period in rats [21], and rats and rabbits were shown to have higher IOP during the dark period compared to the light period [21,68,69]. Thus, we compared the IOPs of mice at different times of day and identified several strains with significantly higher IOP during the dark compared to the light period. The magnitude of the difference varies with strain, and was greatest in SWR/J. The IOP increase in the dark is not dependent on functional rod and cone photoreceptors since these cells degenerate in SWR/J mice due to homozygosity for the Pde6brd1 mutation. In agreement with this finding, circadian regulation of wheel running by light was previously reported in mice lacking rods and cones [70]. Interestingly, the IOP of strain CBA/CaJ, which has one of the highest daytime IOPs does not appear to increase in the dark. Further more detailed studies are needed to define the characteristics of the diurnal rhythm of intraocular pressure in mice, and to determine whether it is lacking or has a different timing in strain CBA/CaJ. Analysis of these mouse strains may increase understanding of the molecular mechanisms controlling diurnal rhythms of IOP and that may be relevant to glaucoma.

Car2 deficiency does not alter IOP

Bicarbonate formation is important for aqueous humor secretion from the ciliary processes and carbonic anhydrase (CA) facilitates this secretion. There are multiple forms of CA and the CAII isoform is reported to be the predominant form in the ciliary processes [71,72]. Our experiments show that a genetic deficiency of CAII in mice homozygous for a mutation in the Car2 gene does not alter IOP. CAIV activity was recently demonstrated in the ciliary processes [73] and so our data may support a more substantial role for CAIV compared to CAII in aqueous humor secretion. It also is possible that CAII substantially contributes to aqueous humor secretion but that functional mouse CAIV is sufficient to prevent an effect of CAII deficiency on IOP in Car2 mutant mice. In support of a role for both enzymes, a greater than 90% inhibition of CA is required for significant reduction of aqueous secretion [71,72].

Tyrosinase deficiency results in increased IOP

Tyrosinase is the first enzyme of the pigment production pathway. Tyrosinase deficiency causes albinism and has various ocular consequences. These include alteration of the number of ipsilaterally projecting retinal axons and substantially increased light penetration past the iris [74]. It is not known if these abnormalities affect mammalian IOP. Here, we show increased IOP in mice lacking tyrosinase activity compared to otherwise genetically identical pigmented B6 mice. Additionally, IOP differences between the light and dark period of the day were detected in the pigmented but not the albino B6 mice. Thus, albinism can affect the diurnal pattern of IOP changes. In agreement with this result, mice with albino eyes that are homozygous for tyrosinase or pink eye dilution mutations have altered diurnal rhythms compared to pigmented mice [75]. Albinism by itself is either not sufficient to alter the diurnal rhythm of IOP or alters it in different ways depending upon genetic background, however, since the albino strains BALB/cByJ and SWR/J had increased IOP during the dark. Diurnal rhythms are known to depend on visual pathways and to respond to light intensity. Exposing rats to 24 hours of low light abrogates the diurnal fluctuation of IOP and results in constantly elevated IOP [36]. Further experiments will determine the nature of the diurnal rhythm of IOP in the albino B6 mice and if its alteration or other mechanisms result in IOP elevation.

Conclusions

A broad range of reproducible IOP differences exists between inbred mouse strains and a diurnal rhythm of IOP exists in different strains. Various factors have been variably associated with risk for increased IOP in humans. Genetically uniform, mice can be used to study the effects of these risk factors on IOP. In trained hands, our measurement procedure is reliable, accurate and rapid enough to allow large scale genetic studies of factors determining IOP. Mice have great potential for helping to characterize the molecular mechanisms affecting IOP.

Materials and Methods

Animal husbandry

All experiments were performed in compliance with the ARVO statement for use of animals in ophthalmic and vision research. All mice were bred and maintained at The Jackson Laboratory. Mice were housed in cages containing white pine bedding and covered with polyester filters. For most experiments, the mice were fed NIH31 (6 % fat) chow ad libitum, and their water was acidified to pH 2.8 to 3.2. B6 mice develop diet induced diabetes when maintained on a high fat diet [76]. To ensure that we were analyzing the effect of age and not diabetes, the B6 mice in the aging experiment were fed NIH31 (4% fat) chow. We have found no differences in IOP between B6 mice housed on the 4% fat and 6% fat versions of this otherwise identical diet. The mice were group housed and the cages were changed one time per week. If any cage appeared soiled between scheduled changes, the mice were placed in a clean cage. The environment was kept at 21°C with a 14 hour light: 10 hour dark cycle. The colony was monitored for specific pathogens by The Jackson Laboratory's routine surveillance program (see  for specific pathogens).

Intraocular pressure

Intraocular pressures were measured as described elsewhere [13,77]. The mice were typically acclimatized to the procedure room for at least 2 weeks prior to measurement, but sometimes between 1 and 2 weeks. Although it was not possible to include all strains in each measurement period, mice of different strains were intermixed. As demonstrated here, the IOPs of C57BL/6J are very consistent over time and so these animals were interspersed with experimental mice during all experiments to ensure that calibration had not drifted and that the system was functioning optimally. Whenever possible, the investigator measuring IOP did not know the genotypes of the animals. It was not possible to analyze all age groups of each strain at the same time in the aging experiments. Therefore, to control for potential IOP changes due to measurement time and not age, approximately 3 month old B6 mice were assessed at the same time as each age group. All dark period measurements were made between 1 and 3 hours after the lights turned off. The room was equipped with dim red lights and mice were protected from all light exposure during set up. Each mouse was briefly exposed to the red light when the anesthetic agents were administered. When adequate anesthesia was achieved (after 3 to 4 minutes), the mouse was placed on the measurement platform and the white light of the microscope was turned on (for approximately 1 and a half minutes) to allow ocular cannulation, IOP measurement and post-measurement tests [13] that guard against artifactual data. The white light was used at very low intensity and was dim but we cannot rule out the possibility that this brief exposure altered the IOP. All other mice were protected from light exposure throughout the time an individual mouse was analyzed.

Blood pressure

The blood pressures of conscious mice of each strain (6 to 12 females per strain) were measured with a tail-cuff system as reported [78], except that 5 days of training were used. The mice were analyzed in the same procedure room as was used for IOP measurment.

Clinical examinations

For most strains, anterior chambers were examined with a slit lamp biomicroscope [16]. At least 8 mice of each strain shown in figure 1 were evaluated. However, the anterior chambers of C57BLKS/J mice were only evaluated under a dissection microscope at the time of IOP measurement.

Histological analysis

Eyes from at least 2 mice of the listed strains were fixed (4% paraformaldehyde or Fekete's acid-alcohol-formalin fixative) processed, paraffin embedded and sectioned as previously reported [15,79], except that the paraformaldehyde was buffered with 0.1 M phosphate buffer. All strains other than CBA/CaHN and C57BLKS/J strains were evaluated. The eyes of CBA/CaJ and BALB/cJ mice were also fixed and processed for plastic embedding (Historesin, Leica, Heidelberg, Germany), and sectioned as previously reported [14,79]. Saggital sections including the pupil and optic nerve were collected and analyzed as they contain most ocular structures.

Analysis of Myoc

Exons and the proximal promoter of the mouse Myoc gene were amplified from mouse genomic DNA using the following combinations of primers:

Exon 1: 5'-cttgcaggagaactttccagaa-3' and 5'-atctcgaaggagattgttatagg-3'

5'-gaccagctggagacccaaaccag-3' and 5'-gctcagatccactgacctaaa-3'

Exon 2: 5'-tgaagccatactttaccaaccat-3' and 5'-caaaagggagaagtctaacttc-3'

Exon 3: 5'-agtcaaggctcacagagctaa-3' and 5'-aagagtagctgctcaccgtgtacaag-3'

5'-agacattgacttagctgtggat-3' and 5'-cggaacttcaccttttctggc-3'

Promoter: 5'-taggagaagtctcattatactgc-3' and 5'-ttcactggaccagcataagga-3'

5'-tctgaggatgttcacaggtttat-3' and 5'-tcttctggaaagttctcctgca-3'

Samples underwent 30 cycles of amplification with Perkin-Elmer Taq polymerase in a PTC Thermal Cycler (MJ Research, MA) (94° for 40 sec, 57° for 1 min, 72° for 2 min). The PCR products we purified and sequenced as described [22].

Abbreviations

Intraocular pressure (IOP), C57BL/6J (B6), chromosome (Chr), polymerase chain reaction (PCR), carbonic anhydrase (CA)

Acknowledgments

We thank Norma Buckley, Felicia Farley and Jennifer Smith for their assistance with data entry, references, and figures. We also thank Jane Barker for the Car2 mice, Marianna Mertts for her help with analysis of Myoc alleles, and members of the John laboratory, Tatyana Golovkina, Edward Leiter and Timothy O'Brien for critical reading of the manuscript. Supported in part by AHAF 97437 and G1999023, NIH EY11721 and HL55001. Core services were subsidized by grant CA34196. Major funding was provided by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. SWMJ is an Assistant Investigator of The Howard Hughes Medical Institute.BRCA2 and homologous recombination

Abstract

Two recent papers provide new evidence relevant to the role of the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2 in DNA repair. Moynahan et al provide genetic data indicating a requirement for BRCA2 in homology-dependent (recombinational) repair of DNA double-strand breaks. The second paper, by Davies et al, begins to address the mechanism through which BRCA2 makes its contribution to recombinational repair. BRCA2 appears to function in recombination via interactions with the major eukaryotic recombinase RAD51 [1,2,3]. We briefly review the context in which the two studies were carried out, we comment on the results presented, and we discuss models designed to account for the role of BRCA2 in RAD51–mediated repair.

Keywords: breast cancer, homologous recombination

BRCA2

BRCA2 was the second breast cancer susceptibility gene to be discovered, and was isolated through positional cloning using data from families with inherited breast cancer [4]. Cells with mutant BRCA2 protein are, like many cancer cells, genetically unstable and accumulate gross chromosomal rearrangements [5,6]. The sequence of this large protein (3418 amino acids) offers very little clue to its function, although there are eight repeated segments (termed BRC repeats) in the middle of the protein that are highly conserved among mammalian orthologs [7,8].

Breast cancer susceptibility genes and DNA repair

Following the landmark discovery by Scully et al that the homologous recombinase RAD51 colocalizes at subnuclear sites with BRCA1 [9], a number of additional results have provided evidence that both BRCA1 and BRCA2 are involved in recombinational repair of DNA damage. BRCA1 and BRCA2 form discrete nuclear foci during the S phase and after exposure to DNA damaging agents [9,10,11]. These foci are probably sites of repair of spontaneous and induced DNA damage [12,13,14]. Cell lines defective in either BRCA1 or BRCA2 are sensitive to damaging agents that form double-strand breaks (DSBs), as are other cell lines defective in recombinational repair (reviewed in [15]). BRCA2 interacts with the RAD51 recombinase via direct protein-protein contacts [16,17,18,19]. Biochemical analysis also showed interaction between BRCA1 and RAD51, although these detected interactions may have been indirect [9]. The BRC repeats of BRCA2 are responsible for direct RAD51 interaction. Cells lacking BRCA1/2 fail to form damage-induced subnuclear RAD51 foci with normal efficiency, suggesting that these proteins are required for the formation of recombinase complexes at the sites of DNA damage [20,21]. Finally, genetic measurements of recombination frequency have shown that Brca1-/- embryonic stem (ES) cells are deficient in recombinational DSB repair [22,23]. The similarity between phenotypes associated with BRCA1 and BRCA2 deficiency, together with data showing a similar effect of DNA damage on distribution of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in repair-proficient cells, led to the hypothesis that BRCA2, like BRCA1, is required for efficient recombinational repair. The paper by Moynahan et al [24] provides important support for this hypothesis.

Measuring DSB-induced recombination frequency in BRCA2-defective cells

Pierce et al have designed a set of recombination substrates for measuring the level of homologous recombination in vivo (Fig. 1) [25]. The DNA substrate contains a pair of mutated GFP genes (GFP encodes the easily detected green fluorescent protein), one of which contains a restriction site for I-SceI, a yeast intron encoded endonuclease with an 18 base pair recognition site. Transient transfection of an I-SceI expression vector results in the production of a DSB in the first mutated copy of GFP. One or both DNA ends formed by the break invade(s) the homologous sequence in the second mutant GFP copy, resulting in repair of the DSB via a homology-mediated gene conversion event. The configuration of the GFP construct is such that homology-mediated repair often results in the formation of a functional copy of GFP. Such events can be detected by fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis by virtue of their expression of GFP.

Moynahan et al [24] have used such a GFP recombination substrate to demonstrate that cells with defective BRCA2 protein are deficient in their ability to repair the I-SceI-induced DSB through homologous recombination. Expression of I-SceI resulted in 1 out of 1400 cells producing GFP via homologous recombination in the human pancreatic tumor cell line CAPAN-1. CAPAN-1 cells carry a deletion of BRCA2 on one homolog and codes for a protein truncated at amino acid 1981 on the other homolog. The authors indicate that the level of I-SceI-induced recombination in CAPAN-1 is over 100-fold less than that seen using other (BRCA2+) human tumor cell lines. The different lines examined, however, are very likely to differ genetically from CAPAN-1 cells not only at the BRCA2 locus, but also at a very large number of additional loci. This raises the possibility that some or even all of the recombinational repair defect seen in CAPAN-1 could be due to mutations at non-BRCA2 loci.

While Moynahan et al were careful to point out this problem, two sets of results argue against the possibility that the recombinational repair deficiency of CAPAN-1 cells is completely independent of its defect in BRCA2. First, in the same study [24], recombination in a mouse ES cell line that expresses only truncated BRCA2 protein was measured. This line was found to have lower recombination efficiency than isogenic cells expressing full-length BRCA2 (the defect observed was about fivefold to sixfold). Second, in an independent study, Powell was able to compare derivatives of CAPAN-1 that differed only in their ability to express full-length BRCA2 protein (S. Powell, personal communication, 2001). In these experiments, the derivative expressing full-length BRCA2 yielded 10-fold more recombinants than controls expressing only truncated BRCA2 (S. Powell, personal communication, 2001). While the experimental design of these experiments was somewhat different from that of Moyna-han et al [24], the results raise the possibility that CAPAN-1 cells have more than one mutation that lowers the efficiency of recombinational repair relative to that observed in other human cell lines. Conversely, the BRCA2 defect in CAPAN-1 could be fully responsible for the 100-fold defect in recombination if the level of BRCA2 complementation observed by Powell was incomplete. Furthermore, the discrepancy between the 100-fold difference between CAPAN-1 and the other human lines as compared with the fivefold to sixfold difference between the Brca2lex1/lex2cells and Brca2+/+ ES cells might simply be accounted for by the fact that Brca2lex1/lex2 is not a null allele. Additional studies are likely to shed light on the efficiency of BRCA2-independent recombination pathways. Taken together, the results indicate that BRCA2 is indeed required for high levels of recombinational repair in both human and mouse.

The function of BRCA2-RAD51 interaction

The second paper providing evidence, by Davies et al [26], is a biochemical study of the interaction between the homologous recombinase RAD51 and a peptide consisting of one of the eight BRC repeats from human BRCA2. Expression of a single BRC repeat (BRC4) had previously been reported to act as an inhibitor of DNA repair by Chen et al [27]. These investigators showed that expression of constructs containing the BRC4 repeat in MCF-7 cells enhances the radiosensitivity of cells and blocks both the G2/M delay associated with damage and the ability of the transfected cells to assembly subnuclear RAD51 foci. In the paper by Davies et al, data provide evidence for a plausible mechanism of the dominant negative effect associated with expression of a single BRC repeat. DNA binding assays and electron microscopy methods were used to show that a BRC3 peptide interferes with the ability of RAD51 to assemble into oligomeric filaments on DNA. A BRC4 peptide was also reported to inhibit the RAD51–DNA interaction. These experiments raise the possibility that the full-length BRCA2 protein could act as a negative regulator of inappropriate RAD51–DNA interaction.

The final experiment reported by Davies et al [26] is particularly important with respect to understanding the mechanism(s) through which BRCA2 promotes RAD51-dependent recombination. The localization of RAD51 was examined in CAPAN-1 cells, the same human tumor line examined by Moynahan et al [24]. It had been shown previously that the small amount of truncated BRCA2 protein expressed by CAPAN-1 cells was mislocalized to the cytoplasm, consistent with the fact that the truncation protein lacks a nuclear localization signal [28]. Davies et al showed CAPAN-1 cells to be defective in nuclear localization of RAD51, raising the possibility that RAD51 is normally carried to the nucleus by binding BRCA2. It is possible that RAD51 may alternatively be capable of BRCA2-independent transport, but mislocalization of BRCA2 to the cytoplasm may sequester RAD51 and block its normal mode of transport. Support for the hypothesis that the observed mislocalization of RAD51 is an indirect consequence of the BRCA2 defect requires reintroduction of functional BRCA2 into CAPAN-1.

Given the elaborate nature of the RAD51–BRCA2 interaction, it seems somewhat unlikely that the only role of BRCA2 in promoting recombination is to serve as a specific nuclear transporter of RAD51. An attractive alternative, favored by Davies et al [26], is that the association of RAD51–BRCA2 is required to maintain RAD51 in a form that is in a state of 'readiness' (Fig. 2a). In the absence of this interaction with BRCA2, RAD51 might exist in a form that is not capable of being recruited into a functional repair complex when damage occurs. For example, previous studies indicated that RAD51 shows little binding preference for single-strand DNA (ssDNA) over double-strand DNA (dsDNA) [3,29]. This result could mean that regulatory factors, such as BRCA2, are required to suppress RAD51–dsDNA interactions to prevent sequestration of RAD51 in a nonfunctional form. Alternatively, or in addition, suppression of RAD51–ssDNA interaction might be important for preventing RAD51 from binding to the regions of ssDNA that form during normal DNA replication. BRCA2 may thus promote RAD51 assembly into recombinational repair complexes via a negative regulatory mechanism (i.e. by blocking RAD51–BRCA2 interaction until damage has occurred and factors required for 'productive' assembly of RAD51 at damaged sites are in place). As mentioned previously, the ability of a BRC peptide to repress the RAD51–BRCA2 interaction could reflect a role of full-length protein in suppressing unwanted RAD51–BRCA2 interactions.

Yet another potential role for BRCA2 in promoting RAD51-dependent recombinational repair is a positive role in assembly of RAD51 at damaged sites (Fig. 2b). Several proteins that interact with RAD51 are thought to 'mediate' assembly of RAD51 at sites of DNA damage (reviewed in [30]). RAD51 paralogs in particular, including XRCC2, XRCC3, RAD51B, RAD51C and RAD51D, may function as a complex that actively promotes RAD51 assembly [31]. BRCA2 could cooperate with RAD51 paralogs in promoting RAD51 assembly, or even provide an alternative assembly pathway. The observation that BRCA2 localizes to damage-induced subnuclear foci with RAD51 seems consistent with the possibility that BRCA2 plays a positive role in assembly of the recombination complex [11].

Finally, it is important to note that the two models for the function of the BRCA2–RAD51 interaction shown in Figure 2 are not mutually exclusive. BRCA2 could prevent inappropriate RAD51 assembly in the absence of damage and promote functional RAD51 assembly at DNA lesions during the damage response. Further experiments are clearly required to clarify the functional interactions between BRCA2 and RAD51 during recombinational repair. It should be relatively straightforward to determine whether the role of BRCA2 is limited to transporting RAD51 to the nucleus. If this were the case, addition of a nuclear localization signal to RAD51 should suppress the RAD51-mediated phenotypes associated with a BRCA2 mutation. However, biochemical experiments are needed to determine whether full-length BRCA2 blocks or promotes RAD51–BRCA2 interaction. Such experiments could also reveal additional roles for BRCA2 in recombinational repair. However, several technical obstacles, including the large size of BRCA2, promise to make biochemical characterization of BRCA2 function difficult.

Abbreviations

DSB = double-strand break; dsDNA = double-strand DNA; ES = embryonic stem; GFP = green fluorescent protein; ssDNA = single-strand DNA.

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Recombination substrates used for assaying homology-directed repair. Cutting at the I-SceI site within the mutant GFP (SceGFP) results in a double-strand break that can be repaired through homologous gene conversion using a 3'-truncated copy of GFP as sequence donor. The mechanism results in the formation of a functional copy of the GFP gene. The model shown assumes gene conversion occurs via the synthesis-dependent annealing mechanism.

Figure 2

Potential roles of BRCA2 in promoting assembly of Rad51 at sites of DNA damage. Chromosomal DNA is shown as pairs of straight lines, Rad51 as open circles, and BRCA2 as grey bars. (a) Prevention of nonproductive DNA interactions. BRCA2–Rad51 interaction is proposed to suppress RAD51–BRCA2 interactions until DNA damage is present. When damage occurs, Rad51 is recruited to damaged sites where is polymerizes into nucleoprotein filaments. In this model, BRCA2 is not required for assembly of functional complexes at damaged sites, only to prevent a substantial fraction of Rad51 from being sequestered in a nonfunctional form. In a BRCA2-defective cell, mutant Rad51 becomes associated with DNA at random sites and is therefore not readily recruited to sites of damage. (b) Positive regulation. BRCA2 is proposed to be required for Rad51 to assemble into functional recombinational repair complexes at sites of damage. In BRCA-defective cells, Rad51 fails to associate with sites of damage due to lack of an assembly factor.Cloning and characterization of the mouse Mcoln1 gene reveals an alternatively spliced transcript not seen in humans

Abstract

Background

Mucolipidosis type IV (MLIV) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder characterized by severe neurologic and ophthalmologic abnormalities. Recently the MLIV gene, MCOLN1, has been identified as a new member of the transient receptor potential (TRP) cation channel superfamily. Here we report the cloning and characterization of the mouse homologue, Mcoln1, and report a novel splice variant that is not seen in humans.

Results

The human and mouse genes display a high degree of synteny. Mcoln1 shows 91% amino acid and 86% nucleotide identity to MCOLN1. Also, Mcoln1 maps to chromosome 8 and contains an open reading frame of 580 amino acids, with a transcript length of approximately 2 kb encoded by 14 exons, similar to its human counterpart. The transcript that results from murine specific alternative splicing encodes a 611 amino acid protein that differs at the c-terminus.

Conclusions

Mcoln1 is highly similar to MCOLN1, especially in the transmembrane domains and ion pore region. Also, the late endosomal/lysosomal targeting signal is conserved, supporting the hypothesis that the protein is localized to these vesicle membranes. To date, there are very few reports describing species-specific splice variants. While identification of Mcoln1 is crucial to the development of mouse models for MLIV, the fact that there are two transcripts in mice suggests an additional or alternate function of the gene that may complicate phenotypic assessment.

Background

Mucolipidosis type IV (MLIV; MIM 252650) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder that is characterized by corneal clouding, delayed psychomotor development, and mental retardation that usually presents during the first year of life [1]. Another interesting clinical characteristic is that patients are constitutively achlorhydric with associated hypergastremia [2]. Patients with MLIV do not show mucopolysaccharide excretion, skeletal changes, or organomegaly like the other mucolipidoses. Abnormal lysosomal storage bodies and large vacuoles have been found in skin and conjuctival biopsies using electron-microscopy and, prior to gene identification, served as the only means of diagnosis [3-5]. A recent report estimates that the carrier frequency of MLIV in the Ashkenazi Jewish population is 1 in 100, and mutations have been reported in Jewish and non-Jewish families [6-9].

The human gene MCOLN1 (GenBank #AF287270) maps to chromosome 19p13.2-13.3 and encodes a novel protein that is a member of the transient receptor potential (TRP) cation channel gene superfamily [7-10]. Protein trafficking studies suggest that MLIV is the result of a defect in the late endocytic pathway, contrary to the other mucolipidoses which are typically caused by defective lysosomal hydrolases [11,12]. Recent work in Caenorhabditis elegans supports this hypothesis. Loss of function mutants of the MCOLN1 C. elegans homologue, cup-5, result in an increased rate of endocytosis, accumulation of large vacuoles, and a decreased rate of endocytosed protein breakdown; while over-expression of this gene reverses the phenotype [13]. Cloning and characterization of the mouse homologue of MCOLN1 is crucial for the development of mouse models of MLIV to further study this disorder.

Results and discussion

Cloning and mapping of the mouse homologue Mcoln1

In order to clone the mouse homologue of MCOLN1, the human amino acid sequence was compared to the high throughput genomic sequence (HTGS) database using TBLASTN, which identified the mouse BAC clone RPCI-23_387H4 (GB No. AC079544.1). Correspondence with the Joint Genome Institute and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) Human Genome Center confirmed the location of this BAC to mouse chromosome 8 and allowed us to construct a physical map of this region [14] (Fig. 1A). The BAC sequence was then compared to the mouse EST database using BLASTN, and multiple ESTs and their corresponding I.M.A.G.E. clones were identified.

Figure 1

Physical and transcript map of the Mcoln1 gene region. (A) Physical map showing a 590 kb segment of mouse chromosome 8 syntenous to human chromosome 19, anchored by the genes Insr and Nte. The region is covered by three BACs: RPCI-23_334D24 (AC087153), RPCI-23_312B8 (AC087150), and RPCI-23_387H4 (AC079544). (B) The transcript map of Mcoln1 shows 14 exons, and the locations of the probes used in this study are illustrated. The map also shows the expanded exon 13 in the alternatively spliced transcript (hashed box). UniGene cluster Mm.39099 is the homologue of the human zinc finger gene (AC001252). It should be noted that the scale of the transcript map is in reference to the 201 kb scale of BAC RPCI-23_387H4.

Three clones (ID Nos. 604971, 1228665, 1247566) from the UniGene cluster Mm. 8356 were obtained, sequenced, and assembled into a 2 kb transcript with an open reading frame of 580 amino acids designated Mcoln1 (GB No. AF302010). Comparison of the cDNA sequence to the BAC clone showed that the gene consists of 14 exons. We then created a transcript map of the Mcoln1 region of mouse chromosome 8 (Fig. 1B), noting the presence of the UniGene Cluster Mm. 39099, a homologue of the human zinc finger gene (GB No. AC001252) that terminates approximately 1.8 kb before the start of Mcoln1; and Nte, the mouse homologue of the human neuropathy target esterase gene (NTE) beginning 130 base pairs after the polyadenylation signal for Mcoln1. The transcript map of the region surrounding Mcoln1 is similar to the corresponding region of the homologous human MCOLN1 region [15], and the presence of the zinc finger gene and Nte confirms and extends the region of synteny between human chromosome 19 and mouse chromosome 8.

Characterization of Mcoln1

Comparison of the mouse and human peptide sequences showed 91% identity (Fig. 2). The C. elegans homologue cup-5 shows 34% identity with Mcoln1 and BLASTP analysis of Mcoln1 identified a putative Drosophila melanogaster homologue that shows 38% identity (Fig. 2). Interestingly, two MCOLN1 amino acid substitutions that result in MLIV occur at conserved amino acids. TMPred analysis  predicts a protein structure that is nearly identical to MCOLN1, containing 6 transmembrane domains with the N- and C-termini residing in the cytoplasm (Fig. 2) [9].

Figure 2

Peptide sequence comparison of Mcoln1 to human, D. melanogaster, and C. elegans (cup-5) homologues. Blue lines indicate transmembrane domains, the red box surrounds the putative channel pore, the orange box surrounds the putative late endosomal/lysosomal targeting signal.

Expression analysis of Mcoln1

Mouse adult multiple tissue and embryonic Northern blots were hybridized using a probe generated from mouse exon 2 (probe 1, Fig. 1B), yielding a band of approximately 2.4 kb (isoform 1), as expected, and a less abundant and unexpected 4.4 kb band (isoform 2) (Figs. 3A &3B). The 2.4 kb band shows ubiquitous but variable expression, with the highest expression in brain, liver and kidney. The fetal tissue blot shows decreasing levels of the 2.4 kb message with increasing gestational age. Since the human MCOLN1 gene encodes a single transcript [7-9], we carried out additional hybridizations with probes generated from various regions of the coding sequence and 3' UTR, and all probes identified the same two transcripts in the mouse (data not shown). In order to verify the presence of a single mouse locus, we hybridized a mouse Southern blot with the exon 2 probe. Four different restriction enzymes were used, and only the expected size bands for the chromosome 8 locus were detected (data not shown).

Figure 3

Northern analysis of Mcoln1. (A) Mouse fetal tissue Northern and (B) mouse multiple tissue Northern blots (Clontech) hybridized with a probe generated from exon 2 (probe 1, Fig. 1B). (C) Hybridization of the multiple tissue blot with a probe from the alternatively spliced segment of exon 13 (probe 2, Fig. 1B). β-Actin control hybridization is shown below each blot.

Characterization of the Mcoln1 alternative splice variant

In order to determine the coding sequence for the larger transcript, we searched the mouse EST database using each intron as well as the genomic sequence flanking the Mcoln1 gene. Two ESTs were identified that contained sequence from intron 12 (GB No. AI430291 and AA874645), and the corresponding clones were sequenced. Clone 408619 (ESTs: GB No. AI430291, AI429558) begins approximately 1.1 kb before exon 13 and continues through the exon and splices correctly to exon 14. Clone 1281641 (EST:GB No. AA874645) begins 175 bp before exon 13 and also splices correctly to exon 14. A mouse multiple tissue Northern was hybridized using a probe generated from the putative intron sequence in clone 408619 (Probe 2, Fig. 1B), which detected only the 4.4 kb band (Fig. 3C).

In order to determine the sequence of the entire transcript, RT-PCR using primers in exons 10 and 11 paired with a primer in intron 12 was performed using BALB/c mouse brain total RNA and the resulting products sequenced. These products show that the larger transcript is due to an alternative splice event that results in an expanded exon 13. Specifically, exon 12 splices at bp 436 of intron 12, creating a large 1614 bp exon 13 that splices correctly to exon 14. The open reading frame of this alternatively spliced transcript is 611 amino acids, 28 amino acids longer than the message encoded by the 2.4 kb transcript.

TMPred analysis predicts that isoform 2 encodes a protein identical in structure to Mcoln1, possessing 6 transmembrane domains and a channel pore, however the protein sequences diverge at amino acid 526. The 55 amino acid C-terminal cytoplasmic tail encoded by the 2.4 kb transcript is completely different from the 86 amino acid tail encoded by the murine specific 4.4 kb transcript (Fig. 4). Clontech Mouse RNA Master Blots were hybridized with the exon 2 and intron 12 probes mentioned above in an attempt to determine if these two transcripts showed differences in expression patterns, however, there was no significant difference in the 22 tissues represented (data not shown).

Figure 4

Peptide sequence comparison of the two alternatively spliced Mcoln1 isoforms. The green box surrounds the divergent c-terminal cytoplasmic tails. The blue lines indicate the transmembrane domains.

Next, we directly compared the nucleotide and amino acid sequence of the alternatively spliced mouse transcript to the entire human MCOLN1 genomic sequence and found no significant similarity. As mentioned previously, Northern blots performed with human MCOLN1 probes show only one 2.4 kb transcript. In addition, we hybridized a human multiple tissue Northern and human Southern with a probe in human intron 12 that is adjacent to exon 13. The probe was located in the region syntenic to that which encodes the alternate mouse transcript. Only the expected bands were detected on the Southern and no bands were detected on the Northern, confirming that this alternative transcript is specific to murine Mcoln1. Recent BLASTP analysis of the alternate Mcoln1 transcript yields a match to a putative 145 amino acid anonymous protein (GB No. BAB25862) predicted from a RIKEN clone. It is obvious from our results, however, that the identification of this sequence as a full-length protein is incorrect since probes unique to the clone, as well as probes containing the Mcoln1 coding sequence, identify the same transcripts.

Conclusions

Comparison of Mcoln1 isoform 1 to its human homologue shows striking similarity at both the amino acid and nucleotide level. All six of the transmembrane domains, as well as the putative cation channel are highly conserved. The putative di-leucine (L-L-X-X) motif at the C-terminus, which may act as a late endosomal/lysosomal targeting signal, is also conserved [9]. This speculation is supported by work with cup-5[13], the c. elegans homologue of MCOLN1, since cellular localization studies suggest that the protein is found in the late endosomes and/or lysosomes.

The mouse Mcoln1 gene has two alternatively spliced isoforms, with isoform 2 having a different c-terminal cytoplasmic tail. The unique 86 amino acid c-terminal tail lacks the lysosomal targeting signal and does not contain any conserved domains when compared against the current profile databases. We speculate that this protein may have similar channel function but an alternate subcellular localization, but this must be proven once isoform-specific antibodies are raised. However, our results suggest that phenotypic assessment of Mcoln1 knock-out mice may be complicated and that care must be taken when interpreting data on mouse gene expression and phenotype.

Interestingly, the second Mcoln1 isoform is not seen in humans and the sequence of the alternatively spliced region is not conserved between man and mouse. To date, very few genes have been reported that show species specific alternative splice variants. MOG, myelin/oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, has many different splice variants in humans that are not found in mice [17]. ATP11B, a P-type ATPase, has a rabbit-specific splice variant that deletes a transmembrane domain and therefore likely alters the putative function of the protein [18]. Sequencing of the human genome has led to estimates of approximately 32,000 genes, a total surprise given the previous significantly higher estimates that were based on the number of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) in the public databases. This apparent disparity suggests a major role for alternative splicing in creating genetic complexity, and has brought the study of splicing regulation to the forefront of molecular genetics. It is likely that an abundance of species-specific splice variants will be identified as the characterization of alternatively spliced transcripts progresses.

Materials and methods

Bioinformatics

We conducted database searches using BLAST  and Draft Human Genome Browser . Sequences from UniGene  were used to confirm the Mcoln1 sequence. We performed motif searches using ProfileScan  and TMPred  and alignment of protein sequences using Pileup (GCG) and Boxshade .

DNA Sequencing

I.M.A.G.E. Clones were purchased from Research Genetics (Huntsville, AL). Sequencing was performed using the AmpliCycle sequencing kit from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA) on a Genomyx LR programmable DNA sequencer.

RT-PCR Reaction

BALB/c mouse brain total RNA was purchased from Clontech Laboratories (Palo Alto, CA) and made to a 1 μg / ml concentration. This RNA was used as a template to create cDNA via RT-PCR using random hexamers and oligo dT primer. The RT product was used to confirm the alternatively spliced form using primers: 5'-CATCTACCTGGGCTATTGC-3' (forward) and 5'-GCTCTCAGGTGGTGGACAC-3' (reverse) in a PCR reaction with an annealing temperature of 61°C.

Southern Blot Analysis

Total mouse genomic DNA was digested using EcoRI, BamHI, PstI, and XbaI. The digests were electrophoresed on a 1% agarose gel at 60V overnight and were transferred onto a Hybond N+ membrane from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech (Piscataway, NJ). A 32P-dATP labeled PCR fragment of the Mcoln1 coding region corresponding to exon 2 was used as a probe (primers 5'-CCCCACAGAAGAGGAAGAC-3' (forward) and 5'-AGATCTTGACCACCTGCAG-3' (reverse) with an annealing temperature of 59°C). Hybridization and washes were carried out in standard conditions [16].

Northern Blot Analysis

Mouse embryo multiple-tissue northern blot and mouse adult multiple-tissue northern blot filters were purchased from Clontech Laboratories (Palo Alto, CA). The filters were hybridized with the 32P-dATP labeled DNA fragment of Mcoln1 coding region corresponding to exon 2 (see above). For the alternative transcript, a probe was generated in the region between exons 12 and 13 with primers 5'-GTGTCCACCACCTGAGAG-3' (forward) and 5'-GAAGTAGCATTCCTGCAGGC-3' (reverse) with an annealing temperature of 62°C. The filters were then hybridized with β-actin probes. Hybridizations and washes were carried out in standard conditions, with the stripping of previously bound probes in between [16].

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grant NS39995.Embryonic stem cells and mice expressing different GFP variants for multiple non-invasive reporter usage within a single animal

Abstract

Background

Non-invasive autofluorescent reporters have revolutionized lineage labeling in an array of different organisms. In recent years green fluorescent protein (GFP) from the bioluminescent jellyfish Aequoria Victoria has gained popularity in mouse transgenic and gene targeting regimes [1]. It offers several advantages over conventional gene-based reporters, such as lacZ and alkaline phosphatase, in that its visualization does not require a chromogenic substrate and can be realized in vivo. We have previously demonstrated the utility and developmental neutrality of enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) in embryonic stem (ES) cells and mice [2].

Results

In this study we have used embryonic stem (ES) cell-mediated transgenesis to test the enhanced cyan fluorescent protein (ECFP) and enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP), two mutant and spectrally distinct color variants of wild type (wt) GFP. We have also tested DsRed1, the novel red fluorescent protein reporter recently cloned from the Discostoma coral by virtue of its homology to GFP. To this end, we have established lines of ES cells together with viable and fertile mice having widespread expression of either the ECFP or EYFP GFP-variant reporters. However, we were unable to generate equivalent DsRed1 lines, suggesting that DsRed1 is not developmentally neutral or that transgene expression cannot be sustained constitutively. Balanced (diploid <-> diploid) and polarized (tetraploid <-> diploid) chimeras comprising combinations of the ECFP and EYFP ES cells and/or embryos, demonstrate that populations of cells expressing each individual reporter can be distinguished within a single animal.

Conclusions

GFP variant reporters are unique in allowing non-invasive multi-spectral visualization in live samples. The ECFP and EYFP-expressing transgenic ES cells and mice that we have generated provide sources of cells and tissues for combinatorial, double-tagged recombination experiments, chimeras or transplantations.

Background

The ease of manipulating its genome has helped establish the mouse as the premier model organism for mammalian genetic studies. Both directed and random mutagenesis approaches, including the technologies of transgenesis and gene targeting in ES cells, have become commonplace. Genetically manipulated mice, often incorporating gene-based reporters, are frequently being used to model and understand mammalian development and disease processes. Fluorescent protein reporters currently represent a superior alternative to other gene-based reporters such as the bacterial lacZ or human placental alkaline phosphatase in that their visualization is non-invasive, and as such does not require chromogenic substrates. Fluorescence can be monitored in real-time in vivo and in situ, and has the added advantage in that it can be quantified. The prototype fluorescent protein reporter is green fluorescent protein (GFP, reviewed in [3]), which is derived from the bioluminescent jellyfish Aequorea Victoria [1].

Green fluorescent variants of wild type GFP (wtGFP) with improved thermostability and fluorescence emission, including enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP, [4]), and mMGFP [5], have gained popularity for use in mice. Recently however, several additional mutants of wtGFP, with altered excitation and emission spectral profiles (i.e. fluoresce in colors other than green), as well as improved thermostability and fluorescence, have been described [4,6].

Dual color imaging of several GFP variant proteins is a very attractive prospect and has become a standard procedure in cell biology [7,8]. It has also recently been demonstrated in a subset of cells within the central nervous system (CNS) of mice using both transgenic and viral infection-based approaches [9,10]. We therefore wished to investigate the feasibility of non-invasive multiple reporter imaging in mice, and as a first step we wanted to ascertain whether we could establish viable and fertile mice with widespread expression of GFP variant reporters.

Results and discussion

We tested several of the available wtGFP variants for developmental neutrality and stability of widespread expression. An ES cell-mediated transgenic approach was used to evaluate the Enhanced Cyan Fluorescent Protein (ECFP) and Enhanced Yellow Fluorescent Protein (EYFP) wtGFP spectral variants [4,11]. ECFP harbors six amino substitutions (Y66W, F64L, S65T, N146I, M153T, V163A) as compared to GFP, whereas EYFP harbors four (S65G, V68L, S72A and T203Y). In addition to increasing the quantum yield and solubility of the proteins these mutations shift the spectral profiles of the translation products [4,11].

A breakthrough in the availability of spectrally distinct autofluorescent proteins came with the cloning of six anthozoan fluorescent proteins all having 20–30% identity to wtGFP [12]. Of these, DsRed1 (referred to as drFP585 by Matz et al., [12]), a 28 kDa protein isolated from the IndoPacific sea anemone Discosoma sp, posseses the longest excitation (558 nm) and emission (583 nm) wavelength maxima known for a wild-type autofluorescent protein. The sequence of DsRed1 has recently been modified and optimized for high levels of expression in mammalian cells by the introduction of 144 silent base pair changes corresponding to human codon usage preferences. We therefore also tested this novel red fluorescent protein (RFP) in ES cells and mice.

Plasmids were constructed for driving widespread expression of each of the gene-based fluorescent protein (FP) reporters and were tested in ES cell-mediated transgenics as described previously [2]. Transgenic ES cells exhibiting robust expression of ECFP or EYFP were obtained at the same frequency as we had previously obtained for EGFP. Cells expressing one or other of the two GFP variant reporters were clearly distinguishable within a mixed population (Fig. 1a,1b,1c,1d). Interestingly however we were unable to recover clones expressing DsRed1 at the same frequency as for the GFP variant reporters after electroporation and selection under identical conditions. Indeed the DsRed1 expressing clones that we were able to recover did not retain their characteristic ES cell morphology, usually appearing smaller and more spherical (Fig. 1e and 1f), or occasionally spindle shaped (data not shown). Unlike the fluorescence produced by the GFP variants which was evenly distributed throughout the cells, the DsRed signal was never homogenous. Red fluorescence was often aggregated in what appeared to be perinuclear regions of the cytoplasm. Similar observations have been made by Furuta and colleagues when they used recombinant sindbis virus for the labeling of dendrites and axons within the CNS of adult mice [10]. In order to generate a DsRed variant that may be amenable to use in ES cells and mice, we recently introduced various sequences that direct nuclear localization to the DsRed coding region. However, again we were unable to generate ES cells or mice exhibiting robust widespread reporter activity (A.-K.H. and V.E. Papaioannou, unpublished observations).

Figure 1

Non-invasive multiple reporter visualization in ES cells. (a-d) a mixture of CK6/ECFP (ECFP+) and YC5/EYFP (EYFP+) ES cells at low density. (a) image taken under bright field with no epifluorescence. (b) dark field image taken through an EYFP filter. (c) dark field image taken through an ECFP filter. (d) dark field double exposure image acquired by consecutively using ECFP and EYFP filters. ECFP+ cells can clearly be discerned from EYFP+ cells. (e-f) culture of mixed populations of ES cells comprising ECFP+, EYFP+ and RFP+ cells. Scale bars represent 100 μm.

Two ECFP+ and two EYFP+ clones exhibiting robust fluorescence were used to generate chimeras through ES cell <-> morula stage embryo aggregation [13]. All four ES cell lines transmitted through the germline, leading to the establishment of, CK4/ECFP and CK6/ECFP, two strains of mice having cyan fluorescent protein expression and, YC5/EYFP and 2A4/EYFP, two strains having widespread yellow fluorescent protein expression. In these mice the respective FP expression is constituitive, starting at preimplantation stages and continuing through postimplantation embryogenesis to adulthood (Fig. 2). One line expressing each color was chosen for further analysis and breeding to homozygosity. The availability of homozygous animals demonstrated that both reporter gene expression and the site of transgene integration were developmentally neutral.

Figure 2

Dual non-invasive reporter visualization in embryos and adult mice. Transgenic animals are hemizygous for either the CK6/ECFP or YC5/EYFP transgenes. (a-d) blastocyst stage (E3.5) embryos, that are either fluorescent or non-fluorescent. Fluorescent embryos are either blue/cyan or yellow/green, thereby being hemizygous for either the CK6/ECFP or YC5/EYFP transgenes respectively. Non-fluorescent embryos (marked with an asterix on panel a) are of the wild type outbred ICR strain. (a) image taken under bright field with no epifluorescence. (b) dark field image taken through an EYFP filter. (c) dark field image taken through an ECFP filter. (d) dark field double exposure image acquired by consecutively using ECFP and EYFP filters. (e-h) two transgenic (TG/+) E13.5 embryos dissected free of their extraembryonic membranes, one is blue/cyan fluorescent (CK6/ECFP transgenic, left) and the other is yellow/green fluorescent (7YC5/EYFP transgenic, right). (e) image taken under bright field with no epifluorescence. (f) dark field image taken through an EYFP filter. (g), dark field image taken through an ECFP filter. (h) double exposure acquired by consecutively using ECFP and EYFP filters. (i-k) two three week old transgenic mice each exclusively expressing either the ECFP or EYFP reporter. All images shown are double exposures taken by consecutively using ECFP and then the EYFP filters under epifluorescence. (i) CK6/ECFP (TG/+) transgenic mouse bottom, YC5/EYFP (TG/+) transgenic mouse bottom. (j) CK6/ECFP (TG/+) transgenic mouse left, YC5/EYFP (TG/+) transgenic mouse right. (k) higher maginification view of the tails of the mice in i and j.

Zygotic expression of the FP transgenes is clearly evident by the blastocyst stage (Fig. 2a,2b,2c,2d) and remains widespread thereafter (Fig. 2). Figure 2 demonstrates that ECFP+ embryos can easily be distinguished from EYFP+ embryos and from non-transgenic non-fluorescent embryos from preimplantation stages (Fig. 2a,2b,2c,2d) to postimplantation stages (Fig. 2e,2f,2g,2h). Additionally adult mice can also be discriminated on the basis of the color of their fluorescence (Fig. 2i,2j,2k).

Even though our RFP transgenic ES cell lines failed to maintain strong uniform expression with in vitro passage, we selected three lines exhibiting the most robust expression for making chimeras, in order to ascertain whether we could achieve, or possibly recover, RFP expression in animals. Cells were flow sorted prior to aggregation so as to enrich for RFP expression. Even though they had lost their characteristic ES cell morphology all three RFP+ ES cell lines went gemline as detected by coat color and PCR for the DsRed1 transgene (data not shown). However expression of the RFP reporter could not be detected in any organ of adult mice nor in embryos (data not shown). This suggests that the DsRed1 RFP reporter was unable to recapitulate the expression profile of the promoter/enhancer combination employed. Therefore it appears that GFP variant reporters are more versatile with respect to their application in mice.

We produced double FP-tagged chimeras in order to assess whether the ECFP and EYFP reporters could be co-visualized within the same animal. The first series of chimeras were generated through the aggregation of tetraploid embryos with FP+ ES cells (or embryos) of the complementary color. The procedure is schematized in Fig. 3a. It is evident that the expression of the two FPs can easily be discerned in these double transgenic embryos where the diploid, embryo-proper compartment is ECFP+ and the tetraploid extraembryonic compartment is EYFP+ (Fig. 3b,3c,3d,3e,3f). Secondly we investigated reporter co-visualization in balanced adult chimeras comprised of both ECFP+ and EYFP+ compartments. These were generated through the aggregation of diploid embryos with diploid embryos (or ES cells) of the complementary color. The aggregated components of the chimera from which each organ originated is schematized in the top right of each panel in Fig. 4. These chimeric adult organs demonstrate that the ECFP+ and EYFP+ cells comprising these chimeras can easily be discerned (Fig. 4). It can therefore be envisaged that two different FP colors could be used in the construction of chimeras so as to tag both mutant and wild type lineages.

Figure 3

Dual non-invasive reporter visualization in chimeric embryos generated by tetraploid <-> diploid aggregation. In all panels the tetraploid compartment is yellow/green fluorescent (EYFP+) and the diploid is blue/cyan fluorescent (ECFP+). (a) schematic representation of the tetraploid procedure. Electrofusion of E1.5 embryos to render the blastomeres tetraploid, in vitro culture, and subsequent aggregation schemes using double-tagged compartments. Sandwich aggregations were made using either ECFP+ (diploid) morulae or ES cells. (b-d) anterior view of an E7.5 double-tagged polarized chimera dissected free of its deciduum and therefore missing primary giant cells and parietal endoderm. Here the epiblast (lower half of embryo) and its derivatives are ECFP+ whereas the extraembryonic ectoderm, the visceral endoderm and trophoblast are EYFP+ (upper half or embryo). (b) dark field image taken through an EYFP filter. (c) dark field image taken through an ECFP filter. (d) dark field double exposure image acquired by consecutively using ECFP and EYFP filters. (e) dark field double filter exposure of an E9 chimera dissected free of all extraembryonic membranes except for a small piece of yolk sac (lower left). The embryo itself is ECFP+ whereas the yolk sac both ECFP+ and EYFP+ in the mesoderm and endoderm respectively. A small number of EYFP+ cells are also observed in the ventral midline of the embryo (arrowhead). This observation has been noted previously in tetraploid chimeras, and is presumed to represent a small population of visceral endoderm cells that fail to be displaced by the definitive endoderm at earlier stages. (f) dark field double filter exposure of an E10 chimera. The embryo is exclusively ECFP+ whereas its placenta (to the left of the embryo) is predominantly EYFP+. The labyrinthine trophoblast layer of the placenta comprises both ECFP+ and EYFP+ cells.

Figure 4

Dual non-invasive reporter visualization in the organs of adult chimeras. All images depict dark field double exposures acquired by consecutively using ECFP and EYFP filters under dark field epifluorescence. Details of aggregates are schematized at the top right of each panel. (a-c) heart and pancreas from double-tagged double-compartment adult chimeras. (a) view of the surface of an adult heart. (b) close-up surface view of ventricle of a chimeric heart generated by aggregation of two diploid morulae, one hemizygous for the CK6/ECFP (ECFP+) transgene and the other hemizygous for the YC5/EYFP (EYFP+) transgene. The regions of yellow/green and cyan fluorescence are clearly mutually exclusive. The striations in the fields of fluorescence represent the proliferative zones present within the ventricle. (c) chimeric pancreas generated by aggregation of a morula hemizygous for the YC5/EYFP transgene with CK6/ECFP ES cells. The restricted fields of fluorescence represent the proliferative zones present within the pancreas. (d) liver from a double-tagged triple-compartment adult chimera. A non-fluorescent morula was aggregated with two clumps of ES cells, one carrying the CK6/ECFP transgene (ECFP+) and the other carrying the YC5/EYFP transgene (EYFP+). An ECFP+ vessel has clonally proliferated and infiltrated the liver lobe (top). Note that unlike in heart and pancreas there appears to be more interspersed blue/cyan vs green/yellow fluorescence present in the liver, possibly reflecting greater cell intermingling during the genesis of this organ.

Conclusions

From these observations we conclude that the blue-shifted ECFP, and the red-shifted EYFP variants of wtGFP are both amenable to use in mice. Also since we have established lines of viable and fertile mice having widespread FP expression we have demonstrated that ECFP and EYFP represent developmentally neutral reporters. Since we were unable to obtain ES cells, embryos or mice with widespread expression of a RFP (DsRed1) we conclude that this reporter is not developmentally neutral or that its expression cannot be sustained at levels high enough for detection, and as such is not as versatile as other gene-based fluorescent reporters.

ECFP and EYFP can be distinguished on the basis of their unique non-overlapping spectral profiles, and chimeras comprised of ECFP and EYFP tagged compartments demonstrate that the two reporters can be simultaneously non-invasively visualized within the same embryo or adult organ. Therefore it should be possible to use flow cytometry to isolate cells expressing either or both of the reporters from embryos or adult organs [14].

These two reporters can also be used to create pairs of donors and acceptors for in vivo fluorescence energy transfer (FRET) [15]. Since the emission profiles of ECFP and EYFP are the least overlapping of all the usable GFP variants, these ECFP and EYFP currently represent the best combination for co-visualization and for use in multi-spectral double-tagged transgenic, chimeric and/or in vivo FRET experiments (reviewed in [16]).

These experiments have demonstrated the feasibility of monitoring multiple FP reporters non-invasively within a single animal, and have shown the developmental neutrality of the FP reporters employed. This should pave the way for novel strategies designed to incorporate the use of compound transgenics or tissue recombination or chimeric analyses where several compartments are to be tagged. This technology should provide new possibilities in manipulating the mouse genome, and non-invasively studying the consequences.

Materials and methods

Vector construction

cDNAs encoding ECFP, EYFP and DsRed were amplified from plasmids pECFP, pEYFP and pDsRed1-N1 (Clontech, Inc.) by PCR using HiFi Taq Polymerase (Invitrogen). For ECFP and EYFP primers used were GFP-L (5'-TTG AAT TCG CCA CCA TGG TGA GC) and GFP-R (5'-TTG AAT TCT TAC TTG TAC AGC TCG TCC), for dsRed primers were red-L (5'-TTG AAT TCG CCA CCA TGG TGC GCT C) and red-R (5'-TTG AAT TCT TAC GCT ACA GCT ACA GGA ACA GGT G). All 5' primers contain a Kozak consensus translation initiation site upstream of the ATG for increased translation efficiency in eukaryotic cells [17]. To construct vectors driving ubiquitous transgene expression in ES cells and mice, the PCR amplified cDNAs were digested with EcoRI and inserted into the EcoRI sites of pCAGGS [18] to generate pCX-ECFP, pCX-EYFP and pCX-DsRed. pCAGGS contains the chicken beta-actin promoter and first intron coupled to the CMV immediate early enhancer, and rabbit beta-globin polyadenylation signal. This promoter/enhancer combination has previously been shown to drive strong and widespread transgene expression in ES cells, embryos and adult mice [18,19].

Tissue culture

R1 ES cells [20] were maintained under standard culture conditions in the presence of LIF, as described previously [21]. 20 μg of SalI linearized pCX-ECFP, pCX-EYFP or pCX-DsRed1 was co-electroporated into 2 × 107 cells with 5–10 μg of circular pPGKPuro [22]. This provided transient drug resistance which could be used as a selection for obtaining individual colonies. Selection was applied 24 hours after electroporation and maintained for 5 days, thereafter cells were propagated in in the absence of selection. Fluorescent colonies were picked into 96-well plates, expanded and archived as described previously ([2]. Clones were screened for strong, stable, and homogenous transgene expression during culture in the absence of drug selection.

Chimera production and germline transmission

ES cell lines exhibiting robust transgene expression in vitro were assessed in vivo for the spatiotemporal extent of transgene expression and their developmental potential in chimeras produced by aggregation with wild type tetraploid ICR embryos so as to produce completely ES cell-derived embryos, as described previously [20,23]. A detailed protocol can be found on the world wide web at . Clones giving fluorescent E12.5 embryos having no readily identifiable malformations were used to generate germline transmitting chimeras by aggregation with diploid wild type ICR embryos as described previously [21,23]. After germline transmission transgenes were bred to homozygosity. Transgenes were maintained on both mixedbred ICR and inbred 129/SvJ genetic backgrounds [24].

Imaging

Photographs of live samples, freshly dissected in PBS ([24] were taken on a Leica MZFLIII stereo dissecting microscope equipped with epifluorescence optics. Filter sets used were: excitation 436/20 nm, dichroic mirror 455 nm, barrier 480/40 nm for ECFP, excitation 500/20 nm, dichroic mirror 515 nm, barrier 535/30 nm for EYFP and excitation 540/25 nm, dichroic mirror 565 nm, barrier 605/55 for DsRed. Adult mice were anaesthetized with avertin. They were then placed on the stage of a stereo dissecting microscope (Leica MZFLIII) from which the objective had been removed, such that they were illuminated using the epifluorescence optics (lamp and excitation filters). Photographs were taken using a Nikon FE10 35 mm SLR camera fitted with individual emission filters. Images were processed using Photoshop software (Adobe Systems).

Footnote

The cyan and yellow fluorescent protein-expressing mice described here have been acquired by, and are available from, the Jackson Laboratory Induced Mutant Resource . They are referred to therein as 003373 Stock TgN(ActbECFP) 1Nagy (CK6/ECFP) and 003772 Stock TgN(ActbEYFP)1Nagy (YC5/EYFP).

Acknowledgements

We thank J.-I. Miyazaki for the pCAGGS plasmid. A.-K.H. is particularly indebted to V. E. Papaioannou for helpful discussion and constructive comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the National Cancer Institute of Canada.Morphological characterization of the AlphaA- and AlphaB-crystallin double knockout mouse lens

Abstract

Background

One approach to resolving some of the in vivo functions of alpha-crystallin is to generate animal models where one or both of the alpha-crystallin gene products have been eliminated. In the single alpha-crystallin knockout mice, the remaining alpha-crystallin may fully or partially compensate for some of the functions of the missing protein, especially in the lens, where both alphaA and alphaB are normally expressed at high levels. The purpose of this study was to characterize gross lenticular morphology in normal mice and mice with the targeted disruption of alphaA- and alphaB-crystallin genes (alphaA/BKO).

Methods

Lenses from 129SvEvTac mice and alphaA/BKO mice were examined by standard scanning electron microscopy and confocal microscopy methodologies.

Results

Equatorial and axial (sagittal) dimensions of lenses for alphaA/BKO mice were significantly smaller than age-matched wild type lenses. No posterior sutures or fiber cells extending to the posterior capsule of the lens were found in alphaA/BKO lenses. Ectopical nucleic acid staining was observed in the posterior subcapsular region of 5 wk and anterior subcapsular cortex of 54 wk alphaA/BKO lenses. Gross morphological differences were also observed in the equatorial/bow, posterior and anterior regions of lenses from alphaA/BKO mice as compared to wild mice.

Conclusion

These results indicated that both alphaA- and alphaB-crystallin are necessary for proper fiber cell formation, and that the absence of alpha-crystallin can lead to cataract formation.

Background

Alpha-Crystallin is comprised of two polypeptides, alphaA-crystallin (alphaA) and alphaB-crystallin (alphaB), which share 55% amino acid sequence homology [1]. They are the most abundant proteins in lens fiber cells [2,3] and exist as heteroaggregates of approximately 800 kDa that can undergo inter-aggregate subunit exchange [4]. The expression of these two proteins in the lens epithelium, however, is not uniform throughout different regions of the anterior epithelium. AlphaB expression is detected in central epithelium and increases from the central to elongation zones, where epithelial cells differentiate into fiber cells. AlphaA, however, is not detected in the central epithelium. The relative proportion of alphaA and alphaB changes from a molar ratio of 1:3 in the pericentral and germative zones to a molar ratio of 3:1 in the elongation zone and fiber cells [2,3]. These differences in the relative proportions of alphaA and alphaB within the lens suggest different functions for the two subunits in the developing lens.

Prior to the 1990's, alpha-crystallin was thought to be a structural protein whose major cellular function was to produce a dense solution necessary for the refraction of light in the lens. During the early 1990's, alpha-crystallin was shown to act as a molecular chaperone, binding to partially denatured proteins, both in vitro [5] and probably in vivo [6], to inhibit further denaturation and aggregation of lens proteins. AlphaA and alphaB were also shown to have sequence homology with several other proteins that are members of the small heat shock protein (hsp) family [7]. Moreover, expression of alpha-crystallin, particularly alphaB, was shown to not be restricted to the lens. AlphaB was found to be expressed at significant levels in a variety of nonlenticular tissues, while alphaA has only been detected in small amounts in a few other tissues such as retina, spleen and thymus [8-12]. Collectively, these findings have challenged the dogma that alpha-crystallin is purely a structural protein necessary for light refraction, and have led to the realization that alpha-crystallin may have a variety of biological functions in the lens.

A much broader scope of cellular functions of alpha-crystallin in lens is inferred from in vitro observations. Both alphaA and alphaB can bind specifically to actin, in vitro [13] and in vivo [14]. Although actin filament formation has been shown to be necessary for differentiation of lens epithelial cells [15], the significance of alpha-crystallin's interaction with actin in differentiation is not known. In the lens, alpha-crystallin also associates with type III intermediate filament proteins and the beaded filament proteins CP49 and CP115, and correct beaded filament assembly has been shown depend on the presence of alpha-crystallin [16]. Beaded filament mRNA levels are greatly increased in differentiating lens epithelium and have been suggested as a pan-specific marker for lens fiber development [17]. Alpha-crystallin has also been shown to interact directly with DNA [18]. In transfected CHO cells, alphaB has also been shown to ectopically localize to interphase nuclei, suggesting a role for this protein in the nucleus [19]. A nuclear role for alphaB in the lens was supported by the findings that a subset of lens epithelial cells derived from alphaB knockout mice demonstrated hyperproliferation and genomic instability [20]. In addition, the administration of exogenous alpha-crystallin to primary bovine lens epithelial cell cultures resulted in the formation of lentoid bodies, consistent with a role for these proteins in lens differentiation [21]. These findings indicate that alpha-crystallin may have a multitude of in vivo functions.

One approach to resolving some of the in vivo functions of alpha-crystallin is to generate animal models where one or both of the alpha-crystallin gene products have been eliminated. Brady et al. [22] demonstrated, by targeted disruption of the mouse alphaA gene, that this protein was essential for the maintenance of lens transparency, possibly by maintaining the solubility of alphaB, or associated proteins, in the lens. These lenses were also reported to be smaller in equatorial and light axial dimensions than age matched wild type lens. It was not possible using the techniques employed in the study to determine if the smaller lenses were due to reduced volume or number of fiber cells. Targeted disruption of the mouse alphaB gene resulted in lenses similar in size to aged-matched wild type lens. Moreover, no cataract formation was observed in the alphaB knockout lenses. These animals have muscle cell abnormalities, severe postural anomalies, selective muscle degeneration, and shorter life spans compared to normal controls [23].

In the single alpha-crystallin knockout mice, the remaining alpha-crystallin may fully or partially compensate for some of the functions of the missing protein, especially in the lens, where both alphaA and alphaB are normally expressed at high levels. The objectives of the current report were to characterize gross morphology of young (5 wk) and old (54 wk) mouse lenses with targeted disruption of both the alphaA and alphaB genes, in comparison to age matched wild type lenses, using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and confocal microscopy, to elucidate the possible functions of alpha-crystallin in the lens. The results indicate that alpha-crystallin is necessary for proper fiber cell formation and resulting lens transparency.

Methods

Lenses

The wild type mouse strain used in this study was the 129SvEvTac mouse. Lenses examined were from 5(8 lenses), 46(8 lenses) and 72(6 lenses) wk old mice.

AlphaA/BKO was generated by cross breeding alphaAKO-127 [22] and alphaBKO-168 mice [23], also in a 129Sv background. These mice also lack the HSPB2 gene product [23]. Lenses examined were from 5 wk (6 lenses) and 54 wk (16 lenses) old mice. All animals were treated in accordance with the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology Statement for the Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and Vision Research.

Immediately after euthanizing animals, eyes were enucleated. A scalpel blade was then used to make a small incision into the anterior chamber near the equator and then both eyes from individual animals were immersed in 5 ml fixative (2% (w/v) paraformaldehyde and 2% glutaraldehyde (v/v) in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.2). Eyes were fixed for at least 24 hr at room temperature (RT) prior to dissection of the lenses. At this time, equatorial and axial dimensions of lenses and gross lenticular appearance were recorded. Statistical analyses on data consisted of Student's t-test, means and standard deviation, using the statistical software package StatMost (Dataxiom Software Inc., Los Angeles, CA).

Confocal microscopy

Lenses were vibratome sectioned into 100–200 μm thick sections along the optical (anterior to posterior) or equatorial axes. Thick sections were fixed in 2% (w/v) paraformaldehyde and 2% glutaraldehyde (v/v) in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer pH 7.2 at RT for 24 hrs then washed several times in Tris buffered saline (0.5 M Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4). To visualize lipid membranes, sections were stained with 1,1'-dioctadecyl-3,3,3',3'-tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate ('DiI';DiIC18; Molecular Probes) as previously described [24]. Sections were then washed several times with Tris buffered saline, and nucleic acids were stained by incubating sections in TBS containing 1 μM SYTOX Green (Molecular Probes) for 10 min at RT followed by several washes with TBS prior to confocal imaging.

Lens sections were viewed on a Zeiss laser scanning confocal microscope model LSM 410 equipped with an Axiovert 100 inverted microscope, an Argon-Krypton 488/568/647 laser, a KP line selection filter, a FT 488/568 Dichroic beam splitter, a FT 560 Dichroic beam splitter, a LP 590 emission filter for viewing DiI, a BP 515–540 emission filter for viewing SYTOX green, and the software package LSM 3.993.

Scanning electron microscopy

Lenses bisected along the optical axes were immersion fixed in 2% (w/v) paraformaldehyde and 2% glutaraldehyde (v/v) in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer pH 7.2 at RT for 24 hrs. Samples were then washed several times with distilled water and postfixed in 1% (v/v) aqueous osmium tetroxide at RT for 1 hr. Lens halves were dehydrated in an ascending ethanol series from 50–100 %. Once lens halves were in 100% ethanol, they were critical point dried in carbon dioxide in a Samdri-790B (Tousimis Research Corp., Rockville, MD). Critical point dried lens halves were secured on aluminum stubs with double sided tape. Mounted specimens were then sputter coated with gold and viewed on a Hitachi S-3500N scanning electron microscope (Tokyo, Japan) at 1–5 kV. This microscope is equipped with Hitachi's patented "Dual-Bias" which allows extremely high emission currents at acceleration voltages of 5 kV and lower.

Results

Equatorial and axial (sagittal) dimensions of lenses, and gross lenticular appearance, were recorded (Table 1). AlphaA/BKO lenses at 5 wks of age were significantly smaller (p < 0.05), both equatorially and axially, than 5 wk old wild type lenses and remain smaller throughout life. Fifty-four wk old alphaA/BKO lenses were much smaller than similarly aged normal lenses, and were similar in size to 5 wk old wild type lenses. Both the 5 wk old wild type lenses and the 54 wk old alphaA/BKO lenses were significantly smaller (p < 0.01) than the 46 or 72 wk old wild type lenses. AlphaA/BKO lenses at 5 wks of age exhibited vacuoles at the equatorial region (Figure 1A see arrows) and an area of slight light scatter at the posterior subcapsular regions (Figure 1B see arrowheads). By 54 wks of age, alphaA/BKO lenses exhibited dense cortical and nuclear cataracts (Figure 1C). No posterior sutures were observed in any of the alphaA/BKO lenses examined. All wild type lenses were transparent upon removal from the eye (Figure 1D,1E and 1F) and had well defined posterior sutures.

Figure 1

Light micrographs of lenses dissected from fixed eyes of alphaA/BKO (A-C) and wild type (D-F) mice. All micrographs were generated using a 4 × /0.10 objective on a Zeiss LSM 410 using transmitted light mode. Images in (A&B) were enlarged compared to images (C-F) (see scale bars). For all micrographs except (B) the objective focal point was set at the equatorial plane of the lens, while (B) was set at the posterior pole of the lens. (A&B) Representative micrographs of lenses from 5 wk alphaA/BKO mice, showing changes in the equatorial (A) and posterior sub capsular (B) regions. (C) Representative micrograph of 54 wk alphaA/BKO mouse lens showing dense whole lens cataract. (D-F) Representative clear lenses from 5 wk (D), 46 wk (E), and wk 72 (F) wild type mice. Arrows (A) indicate vacuoles in the equatorial region of a representative 5 wk alphaA/BKO lens. The arrowheads (B) indicate an area of minor light scattering deep to the posterior capsule in a representative 5 wk alphaA/BKO lens.

Table 1

Dimensions and gross lenticular appearance of lenses.

Examination of mid-axial sections stained with DiI and SYTOX green revealed unique differences in gross morphology and nucleic acid staining between alphaA/BKO lenses and wild type lenses (Figure 2). In five week old alphaA/BKO lenses, Sytox green stained nuclei (green) in the anterior epithelium, equatorial/bow, and posterior subcapsular regions (Figure 2A). Cell nuclei localized to the equatorial/bow region were disorganized as compared to wild type. There were enlarged extracellular spaces between cells in the equatorial/bow region in 5 wk old alphaA/BKO lenses. Fifty-four wk old alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 2B) did not stain for nucleic acid in the posterior subcapsular region, however, the entire anterior subcapsular lens region stained for nucleic acid (refer to Figure 3I for high magnification/resolution image of this area). A defined equatorial/bow region was not observed in these older lenses, and fiber cells extending to the posterior capsule of the lens were not found. Disorganized cellular material capped the anterior region of the embryonic/fetal nucleus, and a distinctive indentation of the lens mass at the equatorial region was apparent in mid-axial sections as well as whole lenses. In alphaA/BKO lenses the embryonic/fetal nucleus (primary lens fibers) had migrated posteriorly and appeared to be in contact with the posterior capsule. In 5 wk, 46 wk or 72 wk old wild type lenses (Figure 2C,2D and 2E), however, there was no posterior or anterior subcapsular nucleic acid staining and the embryonic-fetal nucleus was centrally located, not in contact with the posterior capsule.

Figure 2

Representative confocal optical sections taken from mid-axial vibratome sections of alphaA/BKO (A&B) and wild type (C-E) lenses. All optical sections were generated using a 4 × /0.10 objective on a Zeiss LSM 410. The red color represents DiI staining (membrane), while the green color represents SYTOX green staining (DNA). (A&B) were taken from 5 wk and 54 wk alphaA/BKO lenses, respectively. (C-E) were taken from 5 wk, 46 wk, and 72 wk wild type lenses, respectively. The arrowheads indicate representative anterior epithelial nuclei stained with SYTOX green.

Figure 3

Representative confocal optical sections from alphaA/BKO (A-J) and wild type (K-T) lenses. All optical sections were generated using a 63 × /1.4 objective on a Zeiss LSM 410. The red color represents DiI staining (membrane), while the green color represents SYTOX green staining (DNA). (A-E) are from 5 wk alphaA/BKO lenses. (F-J) are from 54 wk alphaA/BKO lenses. (K-O) are from 5 wk wild type lenses. (P-T) are from 46 wk wild type lenses. (A, F, K, and P) are anterior central cortex and epithelium. (B, G, L, and Q) are equatorial bow region. (C, H, M, and R) are embryonic/fetal nucleus. (D, I, N, and S) are deep anterior cortex. (E, J, O, and T) are posterior subcapsular region. (*) indicates areas devoid of cellular material (B and G). Arrow indicates posterior suture (O). Arrowheads indicate representative nuclei stained with SYTOX green (A, B, E, F, G, I, K, L, P, and Q).

At higher magnification, examination of sections stained with DiI and SYTOX green revealed ultrastructural differences between alphaA/BKO lenses and wild type lenses (Figure 3). Anterior epithelial staining in 5 wk old alphaA/BKO (Figure 3A) and 5 wk old wild type lenses were similar (Figure 3K) with respect to nuclear staining with SYTOX green. However, some differences in 54 wk old alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 3F) were observed in the central anterior epithelium compared to 5 wk (Figure 3K), 46 wk (Figure 3P), and 72 wk (data not shown) wild type lenses. These differences included changes in central epithelial nuclear staining, nuclear shape and epithelial thickness and continuity. Superficial and deep anterior cortical staining was grossly different between alphaA/BKO (Figure 3A,3D,3F and 3I) and wild type lenses (Figure 3K,3N,3P and 3S). In 5 and 54 wk old alphaA/BKO lenses, superficial and deep anterior cortical regions, stained for lipid membranes, did not reveal any patterns typical of fiber cells cut in cross-section or longitudinal section. In 5 wk alphaA/BKO lenses there was a high density of stained membranes per unit area throughout the cortex, with no nucleic acid staining in these regions. In 54 wk alphaA/BKO lenses, large, irregularly shaped cells were observed, interspersed among regions of high membrane staining density per unit area. These large objects were not vacuoles, because examination of the interior of these structures by transmitted and reflected light microscopy showed that the membranes encompassed cellular material (data not shown). In addition, nucleic acid staining was observed (Figure 3F and 3I) within many of these cells exhibiting large cross-sectional profiles. In the wild type lenses, typical cross-sectional patterns of fiber cells organized in radial columns were observed (Figure 3K,3N,3P and 3S).

Ultrastructural differences at the equatorial/bow region were also observed between alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 3B and 3G) and wild type lenses (Figure 3L and 3Q). In contrast to wild type lenses (Figure 3L and 3Q), the alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 3B and 3G) contained large areas devoid of cellular material, their nuclei were not limited to a well defined equatorial/bow region, and ordered radial columns of elongating fiber cells extending from the posterior capsule to the anterior epithelium were not observed. In addition to the equatorial region, ultrastructural differences between alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 3C and 3H) and wild type lenses (Figure 3M and 3R) were observed in fiber cells of the embryonic and fetal nucleus. In 5 wk alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 3C), a greater variation in cross sectional diameter was observed, with cell diameters ranging from less than 2 microns up to approximately 25 microns, compared to the 5 wk and 46 wk wild type lenses, whose diameters ranged from less than 2 microns up to approximately 10 microns (Figure 3M and 3R). At 54 wk, these cells in the alphaA/BKO lenses were larger in cross sectional diameter than wild type, and exhibited a much greater variation in the cross sectional size and cell shape.

Cells adjacent to the posterior capsule of 5 wk alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 3E) exhibited nucleic acid staining, were small and non-elongated, with numerous membrane projections., These were, however, not observed in 54 wk alphaA/BKO lenses. In 5 wk alphaA/BKO lenses, deep to the posterior capsule, larger diameter cells, similar to those observed in the embryonic/fetal nucleus were observed (data not shown). Fiber cells of similar dimension and appearance to embryonic/fetal nuclear fibers were seen at the posterior capsule in 54 wk alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 3J). In both 5 and 54 wk alphaA/BKO lenses, no posterior sutures could be found in any axial or equatorial vibratome sections examined. Posterior sutures were readily found in vibratome sections of wild type lenses (Figure 3O, arrow). Fiber cells attached to the posterior capsule and extending anteriorly were observed in 5 wk (Figure 3O), 46 wk (Figure 3T) and 72 wk (data not shown) wild type lenses.

SEM confirmed many of the observations made by confocal microscopy. In the equatorial/bow region, a disorganized array of relatively small irregular shaped cells were observed in 5 wk (Figure 4A) and 54 wk (Figure 4D) alphaA/BKO lenses, while elongated fiber cells organized into radial columns, with ball and socket interdigitations, were observed in 5 wk (Figure 4G), 46 wk (Figure 4J) and 72 wk (data not shown) wild type lenses. In the anterior cortical region of 5 wk alphaA/BKO lenses, radial columns of cells with numerous cell surface projections were observed (Figure 4B), but these radial columns were no longer present at 54 weeks of age (Figure 4E). In these older lenses, irregularly shaped, convoluted cells, with no recognizable pattern of organization, were present. In contrast, radial columns of elongated fiber cells of uniform size and shape, with ball and socket interdigitations, were present in the anterior cortical region of 5 wk (Figure 4H), 46 wk (Figure 4K) and 72 week (data not shown) wild type lenses. The posterior subcapsular regions of 5 wk (Figure 4C) and 54 wk (Figure 4F) alphaA/BKO lenses were filled with irregularly shaped cells with numerous cell surface projections. In the fetal/embryonic nucleus, elongated fiber cells with numerous long, finger-like projections and furrowed membranes were evident (not shown). No elongated cells extending from the bow region to the posterior capsule of alphaA/BKO lenses were observed. In contrast, radial columns of elongated fiber cells of uniform size and shape containing ball and socket interdigitations were observed in the posterior subcapsular region in 5 wk (Figure 4I), 46 wk (Figure 4L) and 72 wk (data not shown) wild type lenses, and fiber cells in contact with the posterior capsule could be traced back to the equatorial bow region and anterior epithelium.

Figure 4

Representative scanning electron micrographs of alphaA/BKO (A-F) and wild type (G-L) lenses. (A-C) Representative images from 5 wk alphaA/BKO lenses. (D-F) Representative images from 54 wk alphaA/BKO lenses. (G-I) Representative images from 5 wk wild type lenses. (J-L) Representative images from 46 wk wild type lenses. (A, D, G, and J) Equatorial/bow region. (B, E, H, and K) Anterior cortex. C, (F, I, and L) Posterior subcapsular region.

Discussion

One approach to resolving some of the in vivo functions of alpha-crystallin is to generate animal models where one or both of the alpha-crystallin gene products have been eliminated. Brady et al. [22] demonstrated, by targeted disruption of the mouse alphaA gene, that this protein was essential for the maintenance of lens transparency, possibly by maintaining the solubility of alphaB, or associated proteins, in the lens. These lenses were also reported to be smaller in equatorial and axial dimensions than age matched wild type lens, which was very similar to that which was observed with the double knockout lens. Targeted disruption of the mouse alphaB gene, however, resulted in lenses similar in size to aged-matched wild type lens with no cataracts reported [23]. This indicates that alphaA may play a greater role in maintaining the transparency of the lens then alphaB. In the single alpha-crystallin knockout mice, the remaining alpha-crystallin may fully or partially compensate for some of the functions of the missing protein, especially in the lens, where both alphaA and alphaB are normally expressed at high levels. This was supported by the morphological observation made in this study of no posterior sutures or fiber cells extending to the posterior capsule of the lens, ectopically staining nucleic acids in the posterior subcapsular region of 5 wk and anterior subcapsular cortex of 54 wk, gross morphological differences in the equatorial/bow, posterior and anterior regions of lenses from alphaA/BKO mice as compared to wild mice. None of these morphological differences have been reported in the single alphaA or alphaB knockout mice. It must be noted, however, that the alphaA/BKO mice also lack the HSPB2 gene product [23] and the contribution of this protein to normal lens morphology and functions should not be overlooked. Future studies should address the possible functions of HSPB2 in normal lens.

The results of the current study support the hypothesis that alpha-crystallin plays an active role in the differentiation and growth of lens fiber cells. Normal differentiation of lens fiber cells consists of a progression from a simple cuboidal epithelial cell, containing a nucleus and a minimal numbers of organelles, to a stratified layer of elongated fiber-like cells, devoid of nuclei and organelles. Differentiation of epithelial cells occurs in the equatorial/bow region of the lens, where epithelial cells begin to elongate and differentiate into fiber cells of uniform cellular shape, arranged in radial columns of cells extending from the anterior epithelium to the posterior capsule. This process did not appear to have proceeded normally in lenses lacking alphaA and alphaB. The morphological observations presented in this study demonstrate that fiber cells in lenses lacking alphaA and alphaB fail to elongate symmetrically from the bow region and therefore do not establish the typical "onion skin" conformation in which cells extend from the anterior epithelium to the posterior capsule. Additionally, in lenses from 54 wk alphaA/BKO lenses, there was a persistence of cell nuclei in deeper cortical regions, and ectopic cell nuclei were present in large numbers in the anterior central cortex. At 5 wks of age cell nuclei were present, adjacent to the posterior capsule. These morphological observations are consistent with a defect in the normal differentiation pathway of lens epithelial cells into fiber cells.

It is unlikely that these alterations in alphaA/BKO mouse lenses result from increased susceptibility of these lenses to light-induced damage in the absence of the molecular chaperone protection afforded by alphaA and alphaB in normal lenses. With the normal time of eye opening at approximately 14 days after birth, the 5 wk old mice had their eyes open and lenses exposed to light for only about 3 weeks prior to morphological analysis. Moreover, these animals had been exposed to only animal facility fluorescent lighting and were protected from UV light by plastic cages. If lack of protection from light-induced damage was the major factor affecting the changes in these lenses, then the bulk of the damage should have resided along the visual axis, particularly in the central anterior epithelium and subcapsular cortex in the 5 wk lenses, but this was not the case. In these lenses, gross morphological changes were apparent in the equatorial and posterior subcapsular regions. These changes included posterior subcapsular nucleic acid staining, absence of posterior sutures, and small irregularly shaped cells, not arranged in any discernable pattern, in the equatorial/bow region. Systemic stress factors crossing the blood/aqueous barrier might explain some morphological changes at the equatorial region, but this would not explain nucleic acid staining in the posterior subcapsular region. In the 5 wk alphaA/BKO lenses, nucleic acid staining in the posterior subcapsular region is consistent with either anterior epithelial cells migrating aberrantly to the posterior pole, or primary fiber cells failing to fully differentiate by 5 wks of age. These two possibilities could not be differentiated in the methods employed, and were beyond the objectives of the current study. Future studies are being designed to address which of these two processes might explain nucleic acid staining in the posterior subcapsular region. Staining in this region was not observed in older alphaA/BKO lenses, suggesting that this pattern was transient. The fate of the nucleic acid-containing cells in the posterior capsular region of younger lenses is not known at this time, nor is the morphology of earlier stage lenses. Future studies with defined objectives to address the development and progression of morphological changes seen in this study are being designed. The morphological differences in alphaA/BKO lenses, compared to age matched wild type lenses, were consistent with the hypothesis that alpha-crystallin plays an active role in the differentiation and growth of lens fiber cells. In addition, it was clearly evident that alpha-crystallin is necessary for lens transparency.

The final biological event in a lens epithelial cell's life is the transformation from an epithelial cell into a fiber cell, which occurs at the equatorial/bow region of the lens. The newly forming fiber cell continues to differentiate in the cortex until a mature fiber cell devoid of organelles with suture formation at the ends of the cell is formed. This entire process from epithelial cell to mature fiber cell is defined as lens differentiation. The precise spatial and temporal expression of the crystallin proteins in the developing lens may not be simply a consequence of the differentiation process, but instead may play an important, if not essential, role in the differentiation process itself. The results of the current study support this hypothesis.

The exact in vivo molecular mechanisms, by which alpha-crystallin might influence lens epithelial cell differentiation, and maintenance of lens transparency, remain to be determined. AlphaA and alphaB are members of the shsp family [7]. Previous studies have shown that the alpha-crystallin possesses molecular chaperone activity, binding to partially denatured proteins, both in vitro [5] and probably in vivo [6], to inhibit further denaturation. Although this property may be a major contributor to the maintenance of lens clarity, the early changes in the alphaA/BKO lenses indicate a much broader cellular function for alpha-crystallin. Stress proteins have been shown to be expressed in non-stressed cells during development and differentiation [25]. Hsps were shown to be expressed during the differentiation of mammalian osteoblasts and promelocytic leukemia cells [26]. In addition, hsp expression has been shown to accompany growth arrest in human B lymphocytes [27] and macrophage differentiation of HL 60 cells [28]. During myogenic differentiation, mRNA for alphaB increases in conjunction with the induction of mRNA for myogenin, the earliest known event in myogenesis [29]. The addition of exogenous alpha-crystallin to primary bovine lens epithelium was shown to induce rapid changes in cell shape, leading to the formation of lentoid bodies [21]. These studies strongly suggest that the hsp family of proteins has other functions in addition to protecting proteins and cells during stress.

Alpha-crystallin may play a functional role in the cell nucleus and may have a role in regulating the cell cycle. Several heat shock proteins have been found in cell nuclei in the absence of stress [30], and alpha-crystallin has been shown to interact directly with DNA [18]. AlphaB, expressed in transfected CHO cells, has been shown to ectopically localize to interphase nuclei, suggesting a regulatory role for this protein in the nucleus [19]. A subset of immortalized lens epithelial cells from alphaBKO mice have been shown to hyperproliferate [20] suggesting that alphaB may be important in maintaining genomic stability. In lens epithelium derived from alphaAKO lenses, cell growth rates were reported to be 50% lower compared to wild type [31], suggesting a role for alphaA in regulating the cell cycle. All of these findings raise many questions as to the possible role(s) of alpha-crystallin in the nucleus and in cell cycle regulation during differentiation. In the current study, the observation of a disorganized pattern of nuclei localized to the equatorial bow region of alphaA/BKO lenses, and nucleic acid staining of structures throughout the anterior cortex of 54 wk alphaA/BKO lenses, is consistent with a role for alpha-crystallin in the nucleus.

There is extensive evidence from previous studies demonstrating that alpha-crystallin plays a role in the cytoskeletal organization. Both alphaA and alphaB can bind specifically to actin, both in vitro [13] and in vivo [14]. Actin filament formation has been shown to be necessary for the differentiation of lens epithelial cells [15], however, the significance of alpha-crystallin interaction with actin in differentiation is not known. In the lens, alpha-crystallin also forms a complex with type III intermediate filament proteins and the lens-specific beaded filament proteins CP49 and CP115, which may be critical for proper filament assembly [16]. Beaded filament mRNA levels increase greatly in differentiating lens epithelial cells, and have been suggested as a pan-specific marker for lens fiber cells [17]. It is therefore possible that increased synthesis of alpha-crystallin in epithelial cells early in the differentiation process may have profound effects upon the cytoskeleton, which in turn may profoundly affect cell shape and migration. The lack of cellar organization and uniform cell shape at the equatorial region observed in alphaA/BKO lenses supports this hypothesis. Studies are currently underway to characterize cytoskeletal organization in the alphaA/BKO lens.

Competing interests

None declared

Authors' contributions

DLB conceived and designed the study, carried out sample preparation, confocal microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, statistical analysis, and drafted the manuscript. JPB assisted in the production of the Alpha/BKO mice. EFW assisted in the production of the AlphaA/BKO mice, experimental design, and initial fixation of samples. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Pre-publication history

The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:



Acknowledgements

This research was supported in part by a NIH Grant for Vision Research EY02932 awarded to LT.Brn3c null mutant mice show long-term, incomplete retention of some afferent inner ear innervation

Abstract

Background

Ears of Brn3c null mutants develop immature hair cells, identifiable only by certain molecular markers, and undergo apoptosis in neonates. This partial development of hair cells could lead to enough neurotrophin expression to sustain sensory neurons through embryonic development. We have therefore investigated in these mutants the patterns of innervation and of expression of known neurotrophins.

Results

At birth there is a limited expression of BDNF and NT-3 in the mutant sensory epithelia and DiI tracing shows no specific reduction of afferents or efferents that resembles neurotrophin null mutations. At postnatal day 7/8 (P7/8), innervation is severely reduced both qualitatively and quantitatively. 1% of myosin VIIa-positive immature hair cells are present in the mutant cochlea, concentrated in the base. Around 20% of immature hair cells exist in the mutant vestibular sensory epithelia. Despite more severe loss of hair cells (1% compared to 20%), the cochlea retains many more sensory neurons (46% compared to 15%) than vestibular epithelia. Even 6 months old mutant mice have some fibers to all vestibular sensory epithelia and many more to the cochlear apex which lacks MyoVIIa positive hair cells. Topologically organized central cochlea projections exist at least until P8, suggesting that functional hair cells are not required to establish such projections.

Conclusion

The limited expression of neurotrophins in the cochlea of Brn3c null mice suffices to support many sensory neurons, particularly in the cochlea, until birth. The molecular nature of the long term survival of apical spiral neurons remains unclear.

Keywords: ear development, POU factors and hair cells, afferent ear innervation, efferent ear innervation

Background

Brn3c is a POU domain factor that is crucial for inner ear hair cell development. Targeted null Brn3c mutants have no mature hair cells [1,2]. Close examination has revealed that some 'immature' hair cells form in Brn3c null mutants and express cellular markers such as Myosin VI and VIIa, calretinin and parvalbumin [3]. Furthermore, these immature hair cells of Brn3c null mutants undergo apoptosis in neonates [3]. Consistent with an apparent absence of mature hair cells, initial work suggested that all vestibular and most spiral ganglion cells are lost by postnatal day 14 (P14; [1]). However, more detailed quantification by others [3] reported that at P4 about 77% of vestibular neurons and only 29% of spiral neurons are lost. It was suggested that there is possibly a complete loss in adults [3]. Other than these preliminary statements, no data exists concerning the detailed pattern of loss of innervation in Brn3c null mutants.

The initial development and partial differentiation of hair cells in Brn3c mutants could possibly lead to some neurotrophin expression in these cells to sustain sensory neurons through embryonic development and beyond. Data on various single and compound neurotrophin null mutants have shown that the loss of a specific neurotrophin leads to topologically restricted loss of sensory neurons in the embryonic ear [4,5]. Such selective loss in Brn3c null mutants would therefore indicate reduction of a specific neurotrophin in immature hair cells. Moreover, recent work shows that in embryos NT-3 is primarily expressed in supporting cells, moving only around birth into hair cells [6,7]. In fact, the selective loss of vestibular as compared to cochlear sensory neurons (77% versus 29%; [3]) suggests that NT-3 expression may be less downregulated in Brn3c null mutants than BDNF [6,8,9], provided that at least some differentiation of supporting cells takes place. In the ear [4] as well as elsewhere [10] neurotrophins are progressively downregulated in postnatal mammals and possibly replaced by other factors [11].

We have investigated in detail the pattern of innervation in the Brn3c mutants, as well as the expression of NT-3 and BDNF. We want to evaluate a possible correlation between the topology of sensory neuron loss and absence of a specific neurotrophin or topological loss of hair cells at birth and in older animals. This information could be important for an in-depth evaluation of the human deafness related to the Pou4f3 gene, DFNA15 [12].

We report here long term retention of cochlear sensory neurons for at least 6 months, in particular in the cochlear apex, in Brn3c null mutant mice. This retention of afferents and efferents is unrelated to hair cell differentiation as not even immature hair cells can be detected at early postnatal stages with MyoVII immunocytochemistry in this part of the cochlea. This retention of apical spiral neurons is also largely unrelated to neurotrophins which are known to be reduced in their expression in neonatal rodents [4].

Results

To appreciate the effects of the Brn3c null mutation on the pattern of the inner ear innervation, we first want to present the effects of BDNF and NT-3 null mutations at birth [6,13,14]. Null mutants of BDNF or its receptor trkB lose all innervation to the semicircular canals and have a reduced innervation to the utricle, saccule and apical turn of the cochlea. In contrast, null mutations of either NT-3 or its receptor trkC result in loss of spiral neurons in the basal turn with formation of an inner spiral bundle of afferents extending to the basal tip. Our null hypothesis for this study would be that Brn3c null mice show severe compromised production of these neurotrophins and should therefore show a comparable pattern of nerve fiber loss.

Brn3c null mutants at birth (P0)

Vestibular ganglia are smaller in Brn3c null mutants (Fig. 1b) than in control littermates (Fig. 1a), but larger than in BDNF or trkB null mutants of the same age [13,15]. The reduction in apparent size of the vestibular ganglia is in agreement with quantitative data published previously [3,13]. These data suggest a loss of 80–85% of vestibular sensory neurons in BDNF and trkB null mutants [13] and of 77% of vestibular sensory neurons in P4 Brn3c null mutants [3]. Thus, the size reduction in the vestibular sensory ganglion could be compatible with a loss of BDNF production in the immature hair cells.

Figure 1

Size variations of vestibular ganglia in control and mutant littermates labeled with DiI. In newborn animals, the vestibular ganglion shows a dramatic reduction in Brn3c null mutants (b) compared to control littermates (a). Abbreviations for this and other figures: AC, anterior crista; ggl, ganglion; c, spiral capillary; Genic. ggl., geniculate ganglion; GER, greater epithelial ridge; HC, horizontal crista; HaC, vestibular hair cell; IHC, inner hair cell; iHC, immature hair cell; IGSB, intraganglionic spiral bundle; OHC, outer hair cell; PC, posterior crista; S, saccule; SG, spiral ganglion; TM, tectorial membrane; U, utricle; VCN, ventral cochlear nucleus; VG, vestibular ganglion. Bar indicates 1000 μm.

However, the Brn3c null mutants show only a reduced density of afferent and efferent fibers to all vestibular sensory epithelia. There is no specific loss of all afferent and efferent innervation to the canal crista (Fig. 2a), a hallmark of both BDNF and trkB null mutations [13,15]. In fact, the reduction of fibers seems to be rather uniform throughout a given sensory epithelium with the crista innervation being qualitatively no more reduced than the innervation of the utricle and saccule. No loss in specific areas, comparable to that in BDNF null mutant mice, is apparent in the saccule or utricle of Brn3c null mice. Similar patterns of innervation are obtained using acteylated tubulin immunocytochemistry (Fig. 2b).

Figure 2

Innervation of Brn3c null and control ears are shown for newborn mice. There is no specific loss of fibers to any vestibular endorgan, as visualized by DiI labeling (a) or acetylated tubulin immunoreactivity (b). No major differences in pattern of projection through radial fibers are found in the cochlea of Brn3c null mutants (d,f) as compared to control littermates (c). Note, however, the lack of orderly fiber outgrowth to the outer hair cells (c, d). Efferent fibers to the ear show a well developed intraganglionic spiral bundle (IGSB) with no detectable differences compared to controls (e). Bar indicates 100 μm.

Consistent with the finding of Xiang et al. [3] of only a 29% loss of spiral sensory neurons at P4, our data show little difference in the pattern of innervation of the cochlea in P0 Brn3c null mutants (Fig. 2c,2d). No selective loss of spiral neurons is observed in Brn3c null mutants in the basal turn, a feature of either NT-3 or trkC loss [6,9,14]. Likewise, the innervation of the apex (Fig. 2f) shows no detectable abnormality in overall pattern of innervation compared to control animals (data not shown), an indication that BDNF could be expressed in the apex [6]. In addition, the pattern of efferent innervation shows no deviation from normal either (Fig. 2e), whereas they show the same pattern of loss as afferent fibers in neurotrophin null mutants [16]. These data suggest that the spiral sensory neurons develop qualitatively normal at least until P0 and therefore allow normal pathfinding of efferents. Most interestingly, there is no increase in radial fiber spacing in the apex, a specific problem of BDNF null mutants [6,13].

However, there is one qualitative difference not recognized in any single neurotrophin null mutant. Afferents reach all three rows of outer hair cells in the basal turn of control wildtype littermates (Fig. 2c), but both afferent and efferent outgrowth is disorganized to outer hair cells in Brn3c null mutants (Fig. 2d) and does not show any clear organization into three distinct longitudinal fiber bundles paralleling the three rows in the outer hair cell region. These data suggest that fiber organization in the outer hair cell region is partly disrupted in Brn3c null mutant.

Brn3c null mutants at P7/8

Reduction of vestibular innervation is more pronounced than at P0. Loss of afferents and, even more clearly of efferents, is most pronounced in the utricle (Fig. 3a,3b) and saccule (data not shown). In contrast, the innervation to the canal cristae, while reduced, has changed little from P0. In particular the horizontal canal receives a rather dense afferent and efferent innervation in Brn3c null mutants.

Figure 3

Reduction of innervation of the ear is shown in 8-day old mice. While all vestibular sensory epithelia retain some afferent (a) and efferent (b) innervation, there is a more pronounced reduction, in particular of efferent fibers, to the utricle (a,b) as compared to the canals. In the cochlea there is an increased spacing between radial fiber bundles in the basal turn (c,e). No afferents can be traced to the three outer spiral bundles along outer hair cells of mutant littermates (c, e). The apex shows little change, except for the absence of fibers to the area of outer hair cells and the formation of inner spiral bundles passing along the few immature hair cells (d,f,g). The pattern obtained with DiI tracing is identical to that obtained by acetylated tubulin immunoreactivity (f,g). Bar indicates 1000 μm in a, 100 μm in b-g.

The cochlea at P8 shows more qualitative deviations from the normal pattern of innervation. For example, all three rows of outer hair cells now receive both afferent and efferent innervation in the base of control littermates (Fig. 3c). However, no fibers extend to the outer hair cell region in Brn3c null mutants (Figs. 3d,3e,3f). In control animals there is dense innervation of inner hair cells, whereas Brn3c null mutants show a curious aggregation of fibers near focal spots around the habenula perforata. The apex shows less pronounced deviations from normal (Fig. 3f,3g). However, as in the base, afferents and efferents extend sparingly to the outer hair cell region. There is formation of an inner spiral bundle communicating both afferents and efferents between the focal points where fibers appear to pass through the habenula perforata (Fig. 3f,3g). As in newborn animals, efferent fibers closely follow the pattern of innervation displayed by afferents (data not shown).

The limited qualitative effect of Brn3c null mutations on fiber loss is particularly obvious in the P8 Brn3c null mutant apical turn (Fig. 3g). Immunocytochemical and histochemcial data show the presence of only a few immature hair cells in the cochlea (Fig. 4), which amounted to about 1% (Table 1). Not a single immature hair cell forms in the apex of the cochlea. In contrast, more immature hair cells are found in the appropriate position of hair cells in the vestibular endorgans (Table 1). In fact, the vestibular end organs show no overt morphological defect other than the reduced presence of these immature hair cells. Nerve fibers can be traced into the sensory epithelium of P0 and P8 Brn3c null mutants past the habenula perforata and there is a normal location of spiral sensory neurons in Rosenthal's canal in the apex of P8 Brn3c null mutants (Fig. 3d,3g). The cochlea shows other defects as well. For example, the spiral capillary is not found underneath the organ of Corti but in the spiral limbus nearby (Fig. 4). The lack of immature hair cells seems to affect also the formation of pillar cells (undifferentiated almost throughout the cochlea; Fig. 4) and Deiters' cells (not recognizable based on their morphology), a suggestion consistent with recent molecular data on the interaction of hair cells and supporting cells [17,18].

Figure 4

The distribution of hair cells as identified with MyoVII immunocytochemistry is shown for 7-day old whole mounted cochlea (a-d) and the appearance of cytological differentiation is shown as revealed with epoxy resin sections in 7-day old (e-g) and 6-month old (h) control (a,c,e) and Brn3c mutant cochleae (b,d,f-h). Note the uniform staining with this antibody of all three rows of outer hair cells (OHC) and the single row of inner hair cells (IHC) in the wildtype (a,c). In contrast, only few immature hair cells (iHC) are found in the basal turn of the mutant littermate (b) and only an occasional cell is MyoVII immunopositive in the middle turn (d). No MyoVII positive immature hair cells exist in the apex. Sections show the degree of differentiation of hair cells and their innervating fibers stained with tubulin immunocytochemistry (arrow; e-h). Note the presence of a spiral capillary (C) under the tunnel of Corti separating the inner and outer hair cells in the P7 wildtype (e). In contrast, no such capillary is present underneath the organ of Corti in mutants (f-h) and no tunnel of Corti is found either. A tectorial membrane forms (TM) but otherwise there is little cyotological differentiation. Note that tubulin-positive fibers can be traced to the immature cells until 6 months (h). Bar in c indicates 100 μm.

Table 1

Numbers of hair cells and sensory neurons in P7 wildtype and Brn3c mutant littermates

Differences between wildtype and mutants are all highly significant.

Comparison of numbers of immature hair cells in the vestibular and cochlear areas (Fig. 4) with the numbers of surviving vestibular and cochlear sensory neurons does not show any correlation (Table 1; Fig. 5). Only a few undifferentiated hair cells were detected by MyoVIIa immunostaining and only in the basal region of the cochlea. And yet only about 50% of cochlear sensory neurons are lost overall with a less severe loss in the apex in which we could not detect any immature hair cells with MyoVIIa immunocytochemistry. This does not exclude the possibility that even less differentiated hair cells may form in the apex.

Figure 5

This graph shows the reduction in sensory neurons (top) and in hair cells (bottom) between 7-day old wildtype and Brn3c null mutant littermates. Note the sharp reduction to 1% in the cochlear immature hair cells (bottom) whereas spiral sensory neurons (SG) are only reduced by 50% (top). In contrast, 20% immature hair cells could be identified in vestibular sensory epithelia (saccule has been selected; bottom) whereas only around 15% of the vestibular sensory neurons survive to this age (VG; top). For details on the data see Table 1.

The central projection of DiI and DiA traces fibers to the cochlear nuclei (Fig. 6) where they show a clear segregation of apical turn afferents (Fig. 6, green) and basal turn afferents (Fig. 6, red) in both the entering cochlear nerve (Fig. 6a) and the ventral cochlear nucleus (VCN) (Fig. 6b). Qualitative comparable central projections are found in wildtype control littermates (data not shown) and suggest that the central projection to cochlear nuclei is at least until P8 in mice not critically dependent on auditory information or other hair cell-mediated influences, in agreement with recent suggestions [5,19].

Figure 6

These confocal images show the projection pattern of a P8 Brn3c null mutant mouse. DiI (red) was inserted into the basal turn, DiA (green) was inserted into the apical turn. Note that the fibers run in discrete bundles inside the cochlear nerve (a), spiral around each other near the root and project to distinct medial and lateral divisions of the ventral cochlear nucleus (b). These data suggest that a crude cochleotopic projection can form independently of any signaling from the immature hair cells of the cochlea. Arrow indicates the efferent bundle as it leaves the afferent fiber tract. Bar indicates 100 μm.

6 months Brn3c null mutants

Very few fibers (both afferent and efferent) to the vestibular epithelia remain (Fig. 7a), thus displaying a further reduction of the pattern of innervation found in P8 Brn3c null mutants. Notably, there are still a number of fibers extending from the very few vestibular sensory neurons to the canal epithelia, in particular the horizontal canal (Fig. 7a,7b). Only very few fibers extend to the utricle and saccule with the reduction of efferents to these epithelia being almost complete (Fig. 7a and data not shown). Comparable to control mice, there is some transcellular labeling with DiI to cells apparently contacted by the afferent fibers in the Brn3c null mutant utricle (Fig. 7b). However, these cells could not be clearly identified as immature hair cells based on their morphology.

Figure 7

The innervation of sensory epithelia is shown in 6-month old Brn3c null mutant mice. Compared to P8 animals there is a further reduction of fiber density to vestibular sensory epithelia, but fibers can be traced to all sensory epithelia (a,b). Transcellular labeling with DiI (b) suggest contacts between these afferents and immature hair cells. The cochlea shows a much reduced density of radial bundles, even in the apex (c,d). However, spiral sensory neurons are present in Rosenthal's canal (c,d) and fibers extend to the organ of Corti where they form longitudinal tracts in the immature epithelium. Bar indicates 100 μm.

The cochlea, most prominently the apex, receives many afferent fibers, which form an interrupted inner spiral bundle (Fig. 7c). Some of the radial fiber bundles are myelinated (Fig. 7d). Only an occasional fiber extends beyond the inner spiral bundle into the area of the outer hair cells (Fig. 7d). Even at this late stage in maturation there are still numerous spiral neurons present in the apex (Fig. 7c,7d).

In summary, these tracing data suggest that mature hair cells are not necessary to direct fiber outgrowth and to maintain some fibers at least up to 6 months in the apex of the cochlea. Importantly, the spatio-temporal loss of innervation does not follow the pattern of loss known from neurotrophin and neurotrophin receptor null mutations as it starts in Brn3c mutant mice after birth.

In situ hybridization confirms neonatal neurotrophin expression

We processed four ears of P0 and P8 Brn3c null and control littermates for expression of BDNF and NT-3 using the riboprobes previously described [7]. We did not analyze neurotrophin expression in 6-month old animals as neurotrophins are downregulated in neonates [20] and no expression can be found even in normal animals [4]. In the canal cristae we expected, and found, only a BDNF signal. This signal was very strong over hair cells of the P0 control animals (Fig. 8b). In contrast, only a faint signal was detected in the Brn3c null mutant (Fig. 8a) and the few silver grains were located predominantly over the area of the immature hair cells. The BDNF signal in the utricle was clearly centered on the hair cells in the control animal but some aggregation of silver grains appeared also in the Brn3c null mutants (data not shown).

Figure 8

The expression of BDNF and NT-3 mRNA is shown in the P0 vestibular sensory epithelia. Silver grains are false colored as red to enhance visibility against the grey Nissl-stained background. Canal cristae contain only BDNF (a,b), but gravistatic endorgans, such as saccule and utricle, contain both BDNF and NT-3 (c-f). Note the prominent BDNF expression in the hair cell region (HaC) of control canal (b) and saccule (d) and low levels of expression in the Brn3c null mice (a,c) over immature hair cells (iHC). The NT-3 expression is much more diffuse in both control and Brn3c mutant littermates. Bar indicates 100 μm.

In the saccule, we directly compared the BDNF (Fig. 8c,8d) and NT-3 signal (Fig. 8e,8f) of the Brn3c null mutant (Fig. 8c,8e) and control littermates (Fig. 8d,8f). A strong BDNF signal was found over the hair cells of control animals and an occasional immature hair cell also showed a BDNF signal in the Brn3c null mutants. The NT-3 signal was more diffuse in both the control and the Brn3c null littermates but showed some slightly above background signal in the area of the sensory epithelium even in the Brn3c null mutant.

In the cochlea, the BDNF signal was very weak in the base in both the control (Fig. 9b) and the Brn3c null littermates (Fig. 9a). However, there was a surprisingly strong NT-3 signal over the organ of Corti in the apex of Brn3c null littermates (Fig. 9c) that closely matched the signal found in the control littermates (Fig. 9d). The NT-3 signal in the area of the cochlea that corresponds to the IHC's persisted at least until P8 in the apex of Brn3c null mice (Fig. 9e,9f).

Figure 9

BDNF and NT-3 mRNA expression is shown in the cochlea of P0 (a-d) and P8 (e,f) Brn3c null and control littermates. Note the limited expression of BDNF in the basal turn of both wildtype and mutant littermates (a,b) and the much stronger expression of NT-3 in the apex over the region of the inner hair cells in both wildtype and control littermates (c,d). NT-3 expression persists at least until P8 in the apex of Brn3c null mice in an area that topologically compares to the inner hair cells of control animals (e,f, arrows). Bar indicates 100 μm.

Discussion

We will explore five points in this discussion: How the limited expression of neurotrophins relates to the apparent survival of primary neurons until P8; how the known absence of apical hair cells and of classical neurotrophins can be related to the presence of large numbers of apical turn spiral neurons; how absence of differentiated hair cells affects afferent and efferent targeting; and how these data possibly relate to other mutant animals and to children born with profound hearing loss.

Immature hair cells and limited expression of neurotrophins rescue afferent projection until P8

The neurotrophins have long been implicated as the mediators for target mediated cell death. In essence, this theory of regulation of neuronal connections via neurotrophic support implies that only limited quantities of neurotrophins are released by the target tissue to support only properly connected sensory neurons by providing only these with a critical amount of neurotrophins [21]. Past experiments, which eliminated one or more neurotrophins entirely, only partially tested the basic assumption of this theory in vivo. For example, in BDNF heterozygotic animals there is a small decrease in the number of sensory neurons in the ear [13] but no change in the overall pattern of innervation. Moreover, all of the neurotrophin/neurotrophin receptor null mutants studied to date eliminate expression in both the peripheral target and the brain simultaneously and achieve their effects in late embryos. In contrast, Brn3c is barely expressed during embryogenesis in the CNS [22] thus arguing that the survival of ear primary neurons depends crucially on the periphery.

We suggest that limited expression of neurotrophins in the immature target leads to retention of primary neurons and their afferent fibers in newborn and early postnatal Brn3c null mice. In agreement with this suggestion, our in situ data show a severe reduction in expression of BDNF (Figs. 8, 9). Despite this reduction, some, apparently biologically significant low levels of neurotrophins are apparently expressed in all sensory epithelia in embryonic Brn3c null mutants. It appears that even these low levels of neurotrophins in the vestibular sensory epithelia can sustain normal fiber outgrowth and a limited maintenance until P0. The comparatively high level of NT-3 expression in Brn3c null mutant cochlea, which has been shown to be the neurotrophin most prominently supporting spiral sensory neurons [6,9,14], is in agreement with the normal development of cochlear innervation in newborn Brn3c null mutants.

Since BDNF appears to be exclusively produced by hair cells [6,7,20], the lack of terminal differentiation of hair cells appears to be accompanied by only limited expression of BDNF, as is the case in the canal cristae (Fig. 8). Past research has shown that in BDNF and trkB null mutants this innervation to canal cristae is lost before birth [6,13]. That even these low levels of expression are significant is clear from the fact that all canal sensory epithelia receive an innervation by both afferents and efferents at birth and later (Figs. 2, 3). The situation in the utricle, saccule and cochlea is less clear as both BDNF and NT-3 are expressed [6,7]. In fact, it appears that the levels of NT-3 expression hardly differ from those in control littermates (Figs. 8, 9). The latter is particularly obvious in the apex of the cochlea. In fact, in the cochlea of embryos and neonates as well as in the saccule and utricle of embryos, NT-3 is predominantly expressed in supporting cells [6]. This expression of NT-3 in supporting cells in embryos and neonates may even preserve in Brn3c null mutants the numerous spiral sensory neurons in the apex of 8-day old animals (Figs. 3, 4).

Long term survival of apical sensory neurons is unrelated to differentiated hair cells and likely is independent of neurotrophins

Past work has shown that BDNF and NT-3 appear to shift in their expression into inner hair cells around birth or are lost in the ear and other parts of the nervous system [6,10,20,23]. It has been suggested that other neurotrophins may come into play in the ear [11]. However, the apex of Brn3c null mutants, which retains most of the spiral neuron afferents at 6-month, shows no formation of mature hair cells at any time surveyed here (P0, P8, P10). Thus the factor(s) cannot be released by differentiated hair cells but there is an unexplored possibility of generalized expression of neurotrophins at low levels in the undifferentiated epithelia. However, known neurotrophins are largely absent in the adult cochleae [4] and significant amounts of neurotrophin expression appear to develop only in postnatal animals in the CNS [24]. Such expression in the CNS could possibly offset to some extent the peripheral loss of neutrophins in targeted null mutants. This would work only in cases in which the loss of primary neurons would not already be completed long before birth as is the case in the ear [6,13].

It therefore remains unclear what supports the many afferents in the apex of the Brn3c null mutants until 6 months of age or longer, unknown peripheral neurotrophic substances or neurotrophic support provided by the CNS. Comparable long term retention of apical spiral sensory neurons was described for the deaf white cat [25] and may also be the case in humans with congenital deafness.

Growth of fibers to the cochlea does not require mature hair cells

Formation of radial fibers that bring peripheral processes of spiral neurons to the organ of Corti seems to be rather normal, even in the apex of the cochlea which does not even develop immature hair cells recognizable by Myo VIIa. This does not preclude that even less differentiated hair cell precursors may form in the apex or that those precursors have died before birth. Interestingly, the growth to outer hair cells is most affected in Brn3c null mutant cochleae. Instead of extending radially through the tunnel of Corti to outer hair cells, afferents appear to stall and extend in longitudinal directions as inner spiral bundles (Figs. 3, 7). It has been shown that the differentiation of pillar cells depends on activation of Fgfr3 [26] by FGF's, probably Fgf8, a factor produced by developing and mature inner hair cells [18,27]. The formation of supporting cells also appears to depend on the proper expression of various bHLH factors such as Hes 1 and 5 which appear to be regulated by the Notch signaling pathway [17,28,29]. It is possible that the apparent inability of fibers to extend along outer hair cells is related to the lack of differentiation of supporting cells in the absence of mature hair cells. Probing for the proper expression of supporting cell specific markers in Brn3c null mutants is necessary to further evaluate these suggestions.

Previous work has suggested that efferent fibers, derived from facial branchial motoneurons, follow afferents and for that reason reflect in detail all connectional deviations of afferents [16,30-32]. Our data agree with this scenario but extend it. Specifically, efferent fibers may suffer the same loss of their molecularly unknown neurotrophic support as do afferents and therefore show the same spatio-temporal profile of loss (Fig. 3). Alternatively, efferent fibers can sustain established connections only as long as afferent fibers are present. More information on the actual molecular support of efferent fibers in the ear is needed before those two possibilities can be distinguished.

The onset of cochleotopic projections has been investigated in detail in only very few mammals [19]. These data suggest that a cochleotopic projection develops before onset of hearing. Our data show that at least a cochleotopic projection in the cochlear nerve and the cochlear nuclei develops even in Brn 3c null mutants (Fig. 6). Those data are also consistent with the formation of a crude cochleotopic projection in NT-3 null mutants [6,14]. Those mutants have a much more severely reduced density of innervation in the developing cochlea [6,14] than the reduction we found in Brn3c null mutants at P0. In this context, it would be interesting to see whether the recently generated transgenic mouse in which BDNF is expressed under NT-3 promoter control [33] could actually perform an even more pronounced rescue in a Brn3c null mutant background.

Relevance of our findings to other mutations with hair cell loss

Vahava et al. [12] and Frydman et al. [34] have demonstrated that mutation in a single human allele of Pou4f3 (Brn3c) results in a late onset of high frequency hearing loss. Thus far no data are available that correlate the late onset of hearing loss with morphological defects in the cochlea. In fact, an investigation of Brn3c heterozygotic mice showed no additional effect on hearing loss due to haploinsufficiency in these mice [35]. Our data on Brn3c null mouse mutants nevertheless suggest that the high to low frequency progressive hearing loss in humans may correlate with the unknown factor(s) that mediate apical spiral neuron survival into adulthood. Quantitative data on human Pou4f3 cochleae is needed to verify that spiral neuron loss is more pronounced in the basal, high frequency area of these hearing-deficient patients. Similar data are also needed for other congenitally deaf children [36] and in the deaf white cat [25]. Further work on the recently available mutant mice with specific absence of all hair cells [37], outer hair cells in the base [38] or apex [39] could further help to clarify the role of hair cells in forming and maintaining afferent and efferent innervation in these model mice.

Conclusion

The progressive loss of afferent and efferent innervation in Brn3c null mutants shows neither in spatial nor in temporal pattern a resemblance to losses reported in simple BDNF or NT-3 null mutations [6]. Null mutants of ear specific neurotrophins have completed the loss of sensory neurons before birth. In contrast, our results suggest a slow loss of afferent and efferent innervation between P0 and at least 6 months. This late sensory neuron loss is likely not related to known neurotrophin signaling which becomes reduced in neonatal wildtype animals. Other factors, such as GDNF [11,40] need to be investigated in their expression in these mutants and their functional role needs to be assessed, in particular in the cochlear apex.

The long term retention of afferents in the cochlear apex in the absence of any apparent differentiation of hair cells raises hopes for cochlear implants in deaf-born children. Similar long term retention of apical afferents exists in the deaf white cat [25] and should be explored in other model systems with embryonic and neonatal hair cell loss [37,38].

Methods

Breeding and genotyping

Brn3c mice were bred as previously described [22]. Mice were genotyped and Brn3c null mutants were raised to a specific age (P0, N = 8; P7, N = 6; P8, N = 6; 6 months old, N = 2). The animals were deeply anesthetized with pentobarbital and transcardially perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). Ears were postfixed in the same fixative for at least one day prior to dissection.

Tracing of nerve fibers

DiI tracing from the brainstem was performed as previously described [41]. Small filter stripes soaked with saturated DiI were implanted into the efferent fiber bundle near the floor plate or into the ascending or descending afferents in the alar plate [42]. After appropriate diffusion time of the dye, the ears were dissected and mounted flat for visualization in an epifluorescent microscope. Images were taken on black and white film or acquired with a cooled CCD camera and processed using ImagePro software (Media Cybernetics).

Ears were subsequently reacted for acetylated tubulin to reveal the pattern of innervation in addition to the DiI tracing with a different technique as previously described [14]. Briefly, dissected ears were incubated with 1:500 anti-acetylated tubulin antibodies (Sigma, St. Louis) followed by secondary antibodies conjugated to HRP. Dissected inner ears were reacted with DAB and H2O2 for HRP distribution and subsequently viewed as whole mounts.

After photographing as whole mounts, the ears were embedded in epoxy resin and sectioned to reveal the distribution of fibers inside the sensory epithelia in more detail.

Cochleotopic projection was evaluated by inserting DiI soaked filter strips into the base and DiA soaked filter strips into the apical turn of 2 P0 and 4 P8 Brn3c null mutants and a similar number of wildtype littermates. After appropriate diffusion time [43], the brains with the attached cochlear nerve were embedded in gelatin, hardened in 4% PFA over night, sectioned coronally on a vibratome (100 μm thickness) and viewed with a Biorad Radiance 2000 confocal system attached to a Nikon Eclipse 800 microscope. Image stacks were collapsed to view the entire projection in one section in one focal plane.

In situ hybridization

Four ears each of Brn3c null mutants (P0 and P8) and control littermates were embedded in paraffin, sectioned and probed for the presence of BDNF and NT-3 mRNA using the in situ technique previously described [7]. Sections were lightly counterstained and viewed with bright and dark field microscopy. Images were acquired with a CCD camera and displayed as false color images as previously described [18].

Immunocytochemistry of hair cells and quantification of hair cells and neurons

Immunostaining of P7 cochlear whole mounts using the hair cell specific-myosin VII (MyoVIIa) antibody was performed as previously described [2]. Images of labeled organs of Corti were then acquired using a SPOT digital camera (Diagnostic Instruments Inc.) and the number of hair cells was scored from acquired images. To determine the number of hair cells or neurons in vestibular endorgans or sensory ganglia, serial sections were stained with Cresyl Violet and images were similarly acquired and scored. Every other section was scored for each sensory epithelium and every forth section was scored for each ganglion. Only neurons or cells with a clear nucleus and nucleoli were counted and 4–6 samples were counted for each epithelium and ganglion. All data were tested for significance using two-sample Student's t-test with unequal variances.

Authors' contributions

MX generated the null mutation, bred all the mice used for this study and generated the statistical data and the immunocytochemical data with MyoVII, AM conducted the tract tracing studies of cochlear afferents and helped with the histological analysis and assembly of image plates, UP carried out the in situ hybridization for neurotrophins and assembled the plates for these data, BF wrote the manuscript, carried out most of the neuronal tracing and immunocytochemistry for acetylated tubulin and data presentation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements

Supported by the National Eye Institute (EY12020, MX), the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation (MX), the Egyptian Government (AM), the Juselius Foundation (UP), the NIDCD (2 P01 DC00215, BF; DC04594, M.X.), the Taub foundation (BF) and NASA (01-OBPR-06; BF).Function, expression and localization of annexin A7 in platelets and red blood cells: Insights derived from an annexin A7 mutant mouse

Abstract

Background

Annexin A7 is a Ca2+- and phospholipid-binding protein expressed as a 47 and 51 kDa isoform, which is thought to be involved in membrane fusion processes. Recently the 47 kDa isoform has been identified in erythrocytes where it was proposed to be a key component in the process of the Ca2+-dependent vesicle release, a process with which red blood cells might protect themselves against an attack by for example complement components.

Results

The role of annexin A7 in red blood cells was addressed in erythrocytes from anxA7-/- mice. Interestingly, the Ca2+-mediated vesiculation process was not impaired. Also, the membrane organization appeared not to be disturbed as assessed using gradient fractionation studies. Instead, lack of annexin A7 led to an altered cell shape and increased osmotic resistance of red blood cells. Annexin A7 was also identified in platelets. In these cells its loss led to a slightly slower aggregation velocity which seems to be compensated by an increased number of platelets. The results appear to rule out an important role of annexin A7 in membrane fusion processes occurring in red blood cells. Instead the protein might be involved in the organization of the membrane cytoskeleton. Red blood cells may represent an appropriate model to study the role of annexin A7 in cellular processes.

Conclusion

We have demonstrated the presence of both annexin A7 isoforms in red blood cells and the presence of the small isoform in platelets. In both cell types the loss of annexin A7 impairs cellular functions. The defects observed are however not compatible with a crucial role for annexin A7 in membrane fusion processes in these cell types.

Background

Annexin A7 is a Ca2+- and phospholipid-binding protein, which was isolated as the agent that mediated aggregation of chromaffin granules and fusion of phospholipid membranes in the presence of Ca2+. This activity led to the proposal of annexin A7's involvement in the exocytotic secretion of catecholamines [1]. The protein belongs to a family of evolutionarily conserved proteins of a bipartite structure with a variable N-terminal and a conserved C-terminal domain. The C-terminal domain is responsible for the Ca2+- and phospholipid-binding, the N-terminal domain appears to confer functional diversity [2-4]. The binding to negatively charged phospholipids is thought to be mediated by Ca2+ ions.

Annexin A7 is unique in that it carries an extraordinarily long and hydrophobic amino terminus with more than 100 amino acids. Alternative splicing gives rise to two isoforms of 47 and 51 kDa. Both isoforms differ by an additional cassette exon located in the first third of the N-terminal domain. Most tissues harbor only the 47 kDa isoform, both forms are found in brain and heart, while the large isoform is exclusively expressed in mature skeletal muscle.

At the cellular level annexin A7 can be detected in the cytosol, at the plasma membrane, around the nucleus, at vesicular structures including adrenal chromaffin granules, and at the t-tubule system [5,6]. Annexin A7 translocates to membranes in a Ca2+-dependent fashion and, when intracellular Ca2+ levels rise, sequentially redistributes to the plasma and the nuclear membrane as well as to intracellular vesicles. Furthermore, annexin A7 associates with lipid rafts [7]. Lipid rafts play a key role in membrane budding and in vesiculation processes such as endo- and exocytosis [8-10].

Two binding partners of annexin A7 have been identified, sorcin and galectin-3 [11-13]. Sorcin is a Ca2+-binding protein and belongs to the penta EF-hand protein family [14]. Like annexin A7 it binds to membranes in a Ca2+-dependent manner. Sorcin also has been described as interaction partner of the ryanodine receptor, and appears to modulate its function [15]. The influence of the sorcin/annexin A7 interaction on the ryanodine receptor is unknown. Sorcin and annexin A7 are coexpressed in all tissues examined so far [11]. The binding of annexin A7 and sorcin is Ca2+-dependent and occurs at micromolar Ca2+ concentrations. The binding sites have been localised to the amino terminal GGYY and GYGG motifs in sorcin and to the GYPP motif in the amino terminus of annexin A7. The proteins bind to each other with a stoichiometry of two sorcin molecules per annexin A7 molecule [12].

Galectin-3 is a multifunctional oncogenic protein with an anti-apoptotic activity found in the extracellular space, in the nucleus and cytoplasm and in mitochondria. Cytoplasmic galectin-3 correlates with tumor progression and protects mitochondrial integrity. Down regulation of annexin A7 prevents galectin-3 translocation to the perinuclear membrane and increases galectin-3 secretion. For annexin A7 a role for galectin-3 trafficking, apoptosis regulation, and mitochondrial integrity was proposed [13].

The cellular role of annexin A7 is not well understood. It is thought to regulate and stabilize membrane domains and to have a role in Ca2+ homeostasis and Ca2+-dependent signaling pathways. These proposals are supported by data obtained from analysis of annexin A7 deficient mouse mutants. Two annexin A7 129Sv null mice strains were generated independently using a different strategy. The one of Srivastava et al. [16] is lethal. Heterozygous mice exhibit an insulin secretion defect and tumor phenotypes. The null strain reported by Herr et al. [17] is viable, healthy, and shows no insulin secretion defect or other obvious defects. However, in isolated cardiomyocytes the frequency-induced shortening is disturbed. Here we have focused on the analysis of red blood cells and platelets of the anxA7-/- mutant. Generally, red blood cells and platelets were thought not to contain annexin A7 and only recently the 47 kDa isoform has been reported as component of red blood cells [7].

Red blood cells undergo various biochemical or morphological changes that appear to be Ca2+-dependent processes [18,19]. One of them is the release of hemoglobin-containing exovesicles occurring in vivo as well as in vitro [7,20]. This process is thought to represent a protective method of the red blood cell against an attack by for example complement components. Red blood cells which lack the ability to vesiculate cause a disease with red blood cell destruction and haemoglobinuria [21]. There exist two types of vesicles, micro- and nanovesicles with a size of 180 nm and 60 nm, respectively. They are enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipid rich lipid raft domains that are associated with proteins like acetylcholinesterase, cell surface proteins including a complement receptor, and the lipid raft proteins stomatin and flotillin, but they lack any cytoskeletal protein [7]. Furthermore, they contain sorcin and annexin A7 attached to the lipid rafts. Both proteins are more abundant in nanovesicles. The vesicle formation goes along with several other changes in the red blood cell like cytoskeletal rearrangements and changes in the phospholipid orientation in the cellular membrane.

Results

Annexin A7 expression in red blood cells, red blood cell derived exovesicles and in platelets

Salzer et al. recently reported the presence of the 47 kDa isoform of annexin A7 and its partner sorcin in micro- and nanovesicles derived from red blood cells where they are located in the lumen and are also enriched in membrane rafts [7]. We have now extended these findings and show here that the 51 kDa isoform is present as well. In western blots of human red blood cells the 47 and 51 kDa isoforms were detected using mAb 203–217 (Fig. 1). The 47 kDa isoform was detected in silver stained gels and its identity with annexin A7 confirmed by peptide mass fingerprinting (data not shown). The 51 kDa isoform was only detected in western blots.

Figure 1

Expression of annexin A7 in human red blood cells (1) and human platelets (2). Protein homogenates were separated by SDS-PAGE (12 % acrylamide). The resulting western blot was probed with mAb 203–217, visualization was by a secondary peroxidase coupled antibody followed by ECL. Both isoforms are detected in red blood cells, in platelets only the small isoform is present.

Its presence in vesicles led to the suggestion, that, along with raft domains, annexin A7 plays a role in membrane organization and the vesiculation process. To examine this, we analysed the ability of red blood cells derived from the annexin A7 knock out mice (anxA7-/-) to form exovesicles. Because of better accessibility and larger available amounts that led to clear results, we included our data obtained with human blood. Independent of the presence of annexin A7 both types of exovesicles, micro- and nanovesicles, were released after Ca2+/ionophore treatment as determined by acetylcholine esterase activity and microscopic examination. Annexin A7 is present in both vesicle types where it is more enriched in nanovesicles (Fig. 2). The 51 kDa isoform is only detectable in nanovesicles. The quantity of both vesicle types did not differ between wild type and knock out red blood cell vesicles as determined by the AChE-values (A405 nanovesicles: ~0.18; A405 microvesicles: ~0.9; both, for wt and ko). It appears that annexin A7, although it has been described to fuse membranes, is not a key component in the process of the formation of red blood cell exovesicles. When we probed for the presence of sorcin in wild type and mutant vesicles we found that the sorcin levels were reduced in the mutant nanovesicles (Fig. 2).

Figure 2

Enrichment of annexin A7 and sorcin in exovesicles derived from red blood cells. Vesicles from wild type (wt) and anxA7-/- mutant (ko) were generated with Ca2+/ionophore treatment, isolated by differential centrifugation and analysed by immunoblotting with mAb 203–217 and a sorcin polyclonal antibody. In general, annexin A7 and sorcin are more abundant in nanovesicles. The 51 kDa isoform of annexin A7 (arrows) is only observed in nanovesicles. Samples of both vesicles types were normalized according to their acetylcholine esterase activity. Human red blood cells (co) were used for control and normalized independently.

To study the distribution of annexin A7 in red blood cells we used self forming iodixanol density gradients. Both isoforms were present in the soluble fraction as well as in the gradient fractions where they are assumed to be associated with membranes. These membranes are exclusively plasma membranes as red blood cells are free of any organelles. The distribution was however not homogeneous throughout the gradient. This could reflect the binding of annexin A7 to membrane subdomains that have different lipid or lipid/protein composition as discussed by Salzer et al. [7]. Likewise, sorcin does not exhibit a homogeneous distribution in the gradient. Moreover, it segregates into vesicles which are not associated with annexin A7 (Fig. 3). We also tested platelets for annexin A7 expression and detected the 47 kDa isoform (Fig. 1).

Figure 3

Association of annexin A7 and sorcin with distinct red blood cell plasma membrane fractions. Lysed human red blood cells were added to a self forming iodixanol density gradient. The density of the gradient increases from left (1.06 g/ml) to right (1.20 g/ml). Fractions were analysed by immunoblotting using mAb 203–217 and the sorcin polyclonal antibody.

The lack of annexin A7 changes red blood cell morphology and osmotic resistance

As annexin A7 is a component of red blood cell vesicles we studied the consequences of the loss of the protein in the anxA7-/-mouse for red blood cell morphology and osmotic resistance. In a standard 'blood smear' we did not note a deformation of the cells, however dark field microscopy revealed changes in shape and diameter of the anxA7-/-red blood cells. They had a statistically significant larger cell diameter of 6.0 μm compared to wild type with 5.7 μm (p = 0.015, n = 40), a remarkably lower emphasized central impression and a more flat shape (Fig. 4). No significant change in the mean corpuscular volume (MCV) was measured with the ADVIA 120 cell counter.

Figure 4

Dark field microscopy of red blood cells from anxA7-/- mutant (B) and wild type mice (A). The mean cellular diameters are 6.0 μm and 5.7 μm, respectively. The size differences are statistically significant (p = 0.015; n = 40). Bar, 3 μm.

Shape and MCV of a red blood cell essentially influence its function and capillary passage. The typical biconcave form depends on various influences including the membrane lipid composition and the submembranous cytoskeleton [32] where annexin A7 might play a role. The osmotic resistance, which is the resistance towards changes in the extracellular ionic strength, is a convenient assay for analysis of the red blood cell integrity. It is measured as the sodium chloride concentration at which cellular lysis starts (minimal resistance) up to a complete lysis (maximal resistance) of the cells [33]. Osmotic resistance increases with higher MCV, larger surface area and a higher degree of cellular metabolism stabilizing the intracellular ion levels. Aged red blood cells show a lowered MCV and lower osmotic resistance [33]. Similar properties can be observed in red blood cells with lowered membrane permeability. The osmotic resistance of annexin A7 deficient red blood cells is significantly increased compared to wild type cells. The minimal resistance value of knock out cells is observed in a 0.60 % NaCl solution versus 0.65 % for wild type cells. 50 % haemolysis is achieved at 0.516 % NaCl solution for knock out versus 0.564 % NaCl for wild type cells (mean values, p = 0.00066, n = 8; Fig. 5). The resistance width of the knock out cells is slightly lower (0.20 % instead of 0.25 % NaCl solution). We also performed direct measurements of the red blood cell membrane deformability, to further characterize a possible role of annexin A7 on the membrane stability. With micropipette experiments we tried to correlate mechanical characteristics of the red blood cells with their morphology. We could not observe any statistically significant difference of values describing membrane rigidity and lysis force in these experiments (M. Heil, B. Hoffmann and R. Merkel, unpublished results). However, the distinction observed in the osmotic resistance experiments was highly significant and reflects a mean value over a high number of different red blood cells.

Figure 5

Osmotic resistance curves of red blood cells from wild type and anxA7-/- mutant mice. The osmotic resistance towards changes in the extracellular ionic strength is a convenient assay for analysis of the red blood cell integrity. It is measured as a sodium chloride concentration in which cellular lysis starts (minimal resistance) up to a complete lysis (maximal resistance) of a red blood cell. The osmotic resistance of annexin A7 deficient red blood cells is significantly increased compared to the one of wild type (p = 0.00066; n = 8).

These data suggest that annexin A7 contributes to the shape of red blood cells and the osmotic resistance. As we have not observed a binding of annexin A7 to F-actin (data not shown) it could do so either by alteration of the membrane rigidity and/or by affecting the ion homeostasis.

The lack of annexin A7 affects primary haemostasis ex vivo

The use of an advanced electronic cell counter/flow cytometer (ADVIA 120) allowed us to screen other parameters as well despite of the limited murine blood volume. We analysed leukocytes, red blood cells, haemoglobin content, haematocrit, mean cellular volume, mean cellular haemoglobin, mean cellular haemoglobin concentration, platelets, neutrophiles, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophiles and basophiles. In these tests of whole blood we found only a change in the platelet numbers, whereas all other haematological parameters were not affected. The mean platelet counts from wild type and anxA7-/- mutant mice are determined as 674 × 103/μl and 774 × 103/μl, respectively. The platelet counts in knock out mice are significantly higher (p = 0.0275; n knock out = 11, n wild type = 14). An increase in platelet counts is a rather uncommon disorder. In humans, platelet counts normally increase only transiently as in reactive thrombocytosis and under postoperative conditions or are largely increased in neoplastic diseases. By contrast, the anxA7-/-mice are healthy and viable. Therefore we tested the platelet function and performed aggregometry measurements with platelet rich plasma. Platelet activation is observed as a morphological change from the resting discoid state to activated spherical cells with pseudopods. The morphological changes are due to cytoskeletal rearrangements. In vitro the activated cells form aggregates recruiting additional cells in the solution thereby reducing its cloudiness. Analysis of the transmission values of aggregation curves after platelet activation by ristocetin addition (von Willebrand cofactor) showed that both curves differed significantly at the time point of seven seconds after platelet initiation (p = 0.0287, n knock out = 16, n wild type = 15; Fig. 6). Annexin A7 deficient platelets showed a slightly lowered aggregation velocity. When we compared the aggregation curves of human platelets from a healthy donor with the ones obtained from an individual with a von Willebrand factor type 1 defect, we found that the difference in the curves was much more pronounced as observed in our studies of healthy mouse platelets and anxA7-/-platelets. Furthermore we found that murine platelets responded immediately to the initiating chemical whereas human platelets have a lag phase [23].

Figure 6

Platelet aggregation curves from platelet rich plasma of annexin A7 knock out and wild type mice. The transmission values were measured with an APACT photometer and aggregation was initiated by adding ristocetin. The first thirty seconds are given. Constant platelet counts were used throughout all experiments. The aggregation curve data were analysed for slope values, the maximal aggregation amplitude of every single curve was set to 100 %. Both murine curves differ significantly at a time point of seven seconds after platelet initiation, the mutant shows a slightly lower aggregation velocity (p = 0.0287, n knock out = 16, n wild type = 15, mean knock out = 67.7 % transmission, mean wild type = 77.1 % transmission, standard error knock out = 8.3 % transmission, standard error wild type = 13.8 % transmission). Murine platelets react immediately to the initiating chemical and show no lag phase like the normal human platelets. For comparison of the range of the platelet impairment slightly affected human platelets are shown as well (von Willebrand syndrome).

Discussion

Annexin A7 is thought to have a role in vesicle fusion and in regulating and stabilizing membrane domains [1]. The protein has been localized to the plasma membrane including raft subdomains, furthermore it is present in the cytosol where it is found on subcellular vesicle-like structures. This distribution appears to be independent of the tissue or cell type analysed. In specialized or terminally differentiated cells, expression levels increase and frequently the larger of the two isoforms is being expressed [6,34,35].

Red blood cells, which were thought to be devoid of annexin A7, were recently shown to harbor the 47 kDa isoform together with its binding partner sorcin [7]. We showed the presence of the 51 kDa isoform as well, adding red blood cells to the list of cells that harbor this isoform. Salzer et al. [7] not only demonstrated the presence of annexin A7 in red blood cells, they also showed that annexin A7 and sorcin were enriched in membrane raft domains of nanovesicles formed from red blood cells in vitro. Raft domains in general are considered key players in membrane organization and in mediating the vesiculation process. They result from the clustering of sphingolipids and cholesterol in the outer leaflet of the membrane connected to phospholipids and cholesterol in the inner leaflet and are enriched in special proteins. Biochemically rafts are defined as membranes that are resistant to extraction by cold Triton X-100 and can be floated to low densities in sucrose gradient centrifugation [36].

The findings of Caohuy et al. [37] that annexin A7 mediates membrane aggregation also suggested that annexin A7 is an essential component during vesiculation. In addition they reported a further activation of the vesiculation process by GTP and proposed that annexin A7 acts as a GTPase. Similarly, the presence of GTP enhanced the secretion of surfactant by annexin A7. These results were thought to support a direct role for annexin A7 in surfactant secretion, but in these studies annexin A7 mediated membrane fusion was separated from a second GTP-dependent mechanism [38].

Having an annexin A7 knockout mouse we tested the involvement of annexin A7 in budding of red blood cell vesicles. Our data suggest that the efficiency of micro- and nanovesicle formation is not significantly different in wild type and mutant red blood cells. Likewise, Dictyostelium discoideum cells, in which the single annexin gene was inactivated, were not impaired in processes requiring membrane fusion [[39]; and data unpublished]. It might well be that the observed fusion of phospholipid layers by annexin A7 in the presence of high Ca2+ concentrations may turn out to be an in vitro effect. Similarly, the high abundance of annexin A7 in micro- and nanovesicles might be fortuitous as a significant percentage of the red blood cell membrane, with which annexin A7 associates when the Ca2+ levels rise, appears to be involved in the formation of exovesicles. Furthermore, the distribution of both annexin A7 isoforms in gradients of red blood cells indicates a function which differs from organizing subcellular membranes or membrane pathways. Whereas annexin A2 is tightly associated with endosomes and may have functions in membrane fusion and the endosomal pathway, annexin A7 distributes with plasma membrane raft domains of different types and densities. Interestingly, in vesicles of red blood cells lacking annexin A7 the amount of sorcin is lowered, indicating that its localisation is affected by the loss of annexin A7 or its expression during red blood cell development was reduced.

Having excluded a direct role in vesicle formation and membrane fusion, annexin A7 might act by its property as Ca2+-binding protein [17]. Previous results in which annexin A7 was shown to play a role in membrane aggregation might be explained by a supportive function of annexin A7 in that it interferes with the local Ca2+ homeostasis thus influencing membrane organization. As the annexins belong to a wide spread and evolutionarily conserved protein family, redundant, but not identical functions are expected. However, so far no other members of the annexin family, which may substitute for annexin A7, have been described in red blood cells.

The structural basis for the elasticy of red blood cells in circulation are long range molecular functions of the plasma membrane and the membrane associated part of the cytoskeleton [40-43]. Major constituents of the membrane skeleton are spectrin tetramers linked together by short actin filaments and several other proteins covering the entire cytoplasmic surface of the red blood cell membrane [44]. Membrane cholesterol diminishes red blood cell haemolysis by the complement complex, whereas depletion of raft cholesterol abrogates association of all raft proteins with no significant effect on areas in the rest of the cell membrane and deformability [45,46].

Annexin A7 knock out mouse red blood cells show a more flat shape and have a higher osmotic resistance. The presence of annexin A7 may alter the membrane flexibility in that it supports the typical biconcave membrane shape and leads to a lower minimal osmotic resistance. Annexin A7 does not appear to have an influence on plasma membrane integrity itself as the maximal osmotic resistance value stays constant. Ca2+ and membrane skeletal proteins are known to play key roles on the red blood cell membrane shape and stability [47]. Annexins have been reported to bind directly to F-actin, we could however exclude such an activity for annexin A7. Nevertheless it might interact with other components and have a role in organizing the membrane cytoskeleton, controlling raft protein associations or influencing the ionic strength of red blood cells on its own or by interfering with other signaling pathways.

As discussed above annexin A7 could be involved in the cytoplasmic Ca2+ homeostasis. It has been demonstrated that micromolar changes of the intracellular Ca2+ concentration exert a profound effect on the membrane properties that regulate red blood cell deformability [48,49]. Furthermore, the intracellular Ca2+ was shown to regulate the membrane stability through modulation of cytoskeletal protein interactions [50]. Ca2+ also induces a transbilayer phospholipid redistribution inducing a shape change of red blood cells [51]. In addition, Ca2+ ions can drive spiculation of the membrane bilayer without involving the cytoskeleton [52].

We have also observed a defect in platelet function in the annexin A7 mutant. In the platelet aggregation experiments the initial aggregation velocity was slightly, but significantly lower in platelets lacking annexin A7. These data are not reflected by a change in the in vivo bleeding time. However the reaction speed of murine platelets is much higher than those of human and due to the technical setup we might have missed larger changes in the mouse samples. The immediate reaction of mouse platelets and the absence of a lag phase after triggering may be caused by an immediately initiated thrombin generation [22]. As known from the frequent human vWF-syndrome or other haemostatic diseases, small defects often are clinically silent and do not result in physiological changes under normal conditions. Only in situations with severe physical injury, distinct environmental influences or additional platelet attributes like the platelet antigen polymorphism [53] differences might become apparent.

Conclusions

In this paper we report the presence of both annexin A7 isoforms in red blood cells where they are abundant in nanovesicles that form upon Ca2+ addition. The proteins are however not required for the vesiculation process. They are also not essential for the formation of specific membrane domains such as lipid rafts, as exogenously added recombinant annexin A7 redistributed to similar positions in a density gradient containing membranes derived from red blood cells of anxA7-/-mice. The observed cell shape change of erythrocytes lacking annexin A7 might be due to alterations in the erythrocyte cytoskeleton. As a direct interaction with F-actin was ruled out, this effect might be mediated by annexin's Ca2+-binding activity.

Methods

Acquisition of murine and human blood samples

Blood from 129Sv wild type and annexin A7 knock out mice (anxA7-/-) kept under pathogen-free conditions and fed with regular food, was collected in 1 ml syringes with a 22 gauge needle punctating the right cardiac ventricle immediately after they had been killed by cervical dislocation. Coagulation generally was inhibited with 1/10 volume of 10 mM NaEDTA, pH 7.5, already present in the syringe. The mice were killed by cervical dislocation in order to avoid any effect of anaesthetic chemicals on blood parameters. The wild type and mutant mice were matched regarding their age, weight and sex. The daytime of blood collection, sampling site and collection method were kept constant during all experiments. A typical murine blood sample volume consisted of 550 μl, with variations ranging from 200 μl to 900 μl. Human blood samples from the authors were collected by vein puncture using common EDTA-monovettes (Sarstedt).

We performed our studies using well standardized sampling conditions, as differences in the blood sampling site, for example between tail and heart, show large changes in all cell type counts. First and second sample draw affect blood measurements, too [22]. Also the genetic background in common laboratory and transgenic mice affects the phenotype. A change from one strain to another may protect mice from effects of the primarily induced genetic defect. For example, BALB/c mice have a significantly increased velocity of platelet aggregation as compared to 129Sv mice, which were used throughout this study [23].

Self forming iodixanol density gradients of human red blood cells

The subcellular distribution of annexin A7 was addressed according to [24]. Red blood cells were centrifuged and washed in isotonic buffered salt solution, collected in ice cold lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, 200 μM CaCl2, 0.25 M sucrose, and proteinase inhibitors (Roche)), homogenized by a loosely fitting dounce homogenizer and additional passages through a 22 gauge needle. A 50 % iodixanol solution was established by mixing Optiprep solution (60 % iodixanol; Sigma) with buffer (120 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, 1.2 mM CaCl2, 0.25 M sucrose). Seven parts of this 50 % iodixanol solution were mixed with thirteen parts of the red blood cell solution, generating a gradient solution containing 17.5 % iodixanol. The mixture was filled into a centrifuge tube underlayed by cushions of 30 % and 35 % iodixanol and centrifuged for 3 hours at 270,000 × g in a SW41 Ti swing out rotor (Beckman) to achieve a nearly linear density gradient (approximately 1.06 g/ml to 1.20 g/ml) [24]. Fractions of 0.6 ml were collected from the top of the gradient by a 1 ml syringe without using a needle and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for further use.

Exovesicle generation from human and murine red blood cells

Red blood cells naturally can form hemoglobin containing exovesicles. In vitro these vesicle formation is Ca2+ induced. Freshly collected lithium-heparin anticoagulated blood samples were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 400 × g and 4°C. The erythrocytes were washed five times with 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, and 150 mM NaCl (washing buffer). A volume of 500 μl washed red blood cells were combined with 3 ml of vesiculation buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2 adjusted to 5 μM Ca2+ ionophore A23187) and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C. After incubation EDTA was added to the solution to a final concentration of 5 mM and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 400 × g and 4°C. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged for 20 minutes at 15,000 × g and 4°C. The resulting pellet was resuspended in washing buffer and centrifuged at 400 × g again to collect a supernatant enriched with red blood cell microvesicles. The supernatant of the 15,000 × g step was further centrifuged for 60 minutes at 100,000 × g and 4°C. The final pellet of this step was resuspended in washing buffer and centrifuged at 15,000 × g again to purify a supernatant enriched in nanovesicles according to [7,20]. The vesicles were assayed for acetylcholine esterase activity and used for further analysis.

Acetylcholine esterase assay

A 30 μl sample of red blood cell vesicles was mixed with an equal volume of buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100), vortexed and incubated for 5 minutes at 37°C. Subsequently 640 μl sodium phosphate buffer (100 mM Na2PO4, pH 7.6), 50 μl DTNB (5,5'-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid), 10 mM in sodium phosphate buffer), and 50 μl acetylthiocholine chloride (12,5 mM in H2O) were added. The reaction took place at room temperature and was measured photometrically at a wavelength of 405 nm according to the Ellmann' method [25].

Determination of the osmotic resistance of red blood cells

A Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4 buffered NaCl gradient (pH 7.4) comprised of the following NaCl steps was used for this assay: 0.90%, 0.65%, 0.60%, 0.55%, 0.50%, 0.45%, 0.40%, 0.35%, 0.30%, 0.10%. For each step 5 ml of the gradient step solution and 50 μl blood sample were carefully inverted four times and incubated for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples were carefully inverted again and centrifuged at 1,500 × g for 10 minutes. From 1 ml supernatant of each step the extinction at 546 nm wavelength was measured. The experiment was performed at room temperature.

Platelet aggregation assay

Approximately 500 μl of murine blood were centrifuged at 200 × g for 15 minutes. The resulting supernatants were transferred to new tubes and used as platelet rich plasma (PRP). The platelet aggregation measurements were done according to the method developed by Born and Cross [26] using an APACT photometer (Labor, Ahrendsburg, FRG) and the APACT software (APACT 1.4). Subsequently samples of the PRP were adjusted with buffer (5 mM Hepes, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.3) to 250,000 platelets/μl. A constant platelet count was used throughout allowing comparisons between wild type and knock out murine and human samples. 250 μl adjusted platelets were prewarmed to 37°C and used in the assay, and the aggregation process was started by adding 25 μl of a prewarmed 16.5 mg/ml ristocetin solution (DiaMed Diagnostica, Bensheim, FRG; concentration in the assay: 1.5 mg/ml), a reagent which worked reliably in our hands with mouse and human platelets. Each murine assay represents a different animal. Analyses of human blood samples were performed as described in the manufacturer's protocol. Several repeated measurements were done per human individual to control the reproducibility. The acquired aggregation curve data, measured as ascending degree of transmission, were analysed for maximal slope values, while the maximal aggregation amplitude of every single curve was set to 100 %. In general, all platelet procedures were done at 22°C within four hours after collecting the blood sample.

Miscellaneous methods

For standard haematopoetic measurements and cell counts on murine and human blood samples about 300 μl of blood were analysed with an ADVIA 120 electronic cell counter (Bayer). With this equipment red blood cells and platelets are "transformed" into spherical bodies without changing their volume. Therefore number and volume of red blood cells and platelets are not calculated values, but directly measured values. The following data were statistically analysed: leucocytes, red blood cells, haemoglobin, haematocrit, mean cellular volume, mean cellular haemoglobin, mean cellular haemoglobin concentration, platelet number, neutrophiles, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophiles, basophiles.

Peptide mass fingerprinting was performed on a Bruker Reflex IV MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer. Recombinant annexin A7 was purified according to [27], F-actin-binding of recombinant annexin A7 was done as described [28]. SDS-PAGE and western blotting were done as described [29,30]. Detection in immunoblots was with enhanced chemiluminescence [17]. Antibodies employed were mab 203–217 directed against mouse annexin A7 core domain [5] and a polyclonal rabbit anti-sorcin antibody [31].

For statistical analyses the following tests were performed: David et al. range test to ensure samples are from a normal distribution, F-test looking for a samples' homoscedascity, Student's T-test to judge if samples of different groups have a different mean value and are parts from different normal distributions. The exact probability values and the significance of an analysis are indicated when the experiments are described.

Authors' contributions

CH and CSC planned and carried out the experiments with the red blood cells and platelets and the fractionation studies and drafted the manuscript, GL was responsible for platelets, RK gave support on the ADVIA 120 cell counter, evaluated and discussed the results, SMP and BSG gave support on the APACT system, platelet aggregation experiments, and evaluated the results, CZ was responsible for the sorcin studies, MS studied the cytoskeletal activities of the protein, AAN conceived of the studies and participated in its design. All authors read and approved the manuscript.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank M. Heil, B. Hoffmann and R. Merkel for the biophysical experiments, L. Eichinger for discussion, B. Gassen for expert technical assistance and R. Müller for protein purification. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed in the central service facilities of the ZMMK. This worked is supported by a grant from the ZMMK (Center of Molecular Medicine Cologne).A model of tripeptidyl-peptidase I (CLN2), a ubiquitous and highly conserved member of the sedolisin family of serine-carboxyl peptidases

Abstract

Background

Tripeptidyl-peptidase I, also known as CLN2, is a member of the family of sedolisins (serine-carboxyl peptidases). In humans, defects in expression of this enzyme lead to a fatal neurodegenerative disease, classical late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Similar enzymes have been found in the genomic sequences of several species, but neither systematic analyses of their distribution nor modeling of their structures have been previously attempted.

Results

We have analyzed the presence of orthologs of human CLN2 in the genomic sequences of a number of eukaryotic species. Enzymes with sequences sharing over 80% identity have been found in the genomes of macaque, mouse, rat, dog, and cow. Closely related, although clearly distinct, enzymes are present in fish (fugu and zebra), as well as in frogs (Xenopus tropicalis). A three-dimensional model of human CLN2 was built based mainly on the homology with Pseudomonas sp. 101 sedolisin.

Conclusion

CLN2 is very highly conserved and widely distributed among higher organisms and may play an important role in their life cycles. The model presented here indicates a very open and accessible active site that is almost completely conserved among all known CLN2 enzymes. This result is somehow surprising for a tripeptidase where the presence of a more constrained binding pocket was anticipated. This structural model should be useful in the search for the physiological substrates of these enzymes and in the design of more specific inhibitors of CLN2.

Background

Although the existence of tripeptidyl-peptidase I (TPP-I) was first noted over 40 years ago [1], the structural and mechanistic basis of its activity has been largely misunderstood until quite recently. The situation changed after it was shown that TPP-I is identical to an independently characterized enzyme named CLN2. It was also demonstrated that mutations leading to abolishment of the enzymatic activity of CLN2 were the direct cause of a fatal inherited neurodegenerative disease, classical late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis [2]. This important observation was followed by the identification of CLN2 as a serine peptidase [3,4], without, however, specifying its structural fold and the details of the catalytic site. More accurate placement of CLN2 within the context of a family of related enzymes became possible only after high-resolution crystal structures of two bacterial enzymes with a limited sequence similarity to CLN2, sedolisin and kumamolisin, became available [5-7]. These structures defined a novel family of enzymes, now called sedolisins or serine-carboxyl peptidases, that is characterized by the utilization of a fully conserved catalytic triad (Ser, Glu, Asp) and by the presence of an Asp in the oxyanion hole [8]. Sedolisin and its several variants (e.g., kumamolisin, aorsin [9], and physarolisin [10]) have now been found in archaea, bacteria, fungi and amoebae, whereas the higher organisms seem to contain only variants of CLN2 [8]. The physiological role of sedolisins in the lower organisms has not yet been elucidated.

Despite the potential medical importance of CLN2 and related enzymes, no systematic studies of their genomic distribution have been published to date. There are also no published reports of the crystallization of this enzyme. In the absence of an experimental structure obtained by crystallography or NMR it is sometimes necessary to resort to molecular modeling in order to provide a structural basis for the explanation of the biological properties of an enzyme, and, in particular, to initiate design of its inhibitors. Examples of such very successful and useful modeling efforts are provided by HIV protease [11], or very recently by the peptidase from a coronavirus involved in the severe acute respiratory syndrome [12], among others. We have now applied the tools of molecular homology modeling to predicting a structure of CLN2 that could be used as a basis for a search for the biological substrates of this family of enzymes and for the design of specific inhibitors.

Results and discussion

Sequence comparisons of the CLN2-like enzymes

Mammalian enzymes homologous to human CLN2 [2,4] form a subfamily of sedolisins with highly conserved sequences (Figure 1). These enzymes are expressed with a prosegment consisting of 195 residues that is cleaved off during maturation, yielding the active catalytic domain. Complete sequences are available for CLN2 from six species in which it has been found so far (human, macaque, dog, mouse, rat, and cow). The full-length enzymes consist of 563 amino acids arranged in a single polypeptide chain containing both the prosegment and the catalytic domain, with the exception of mouse CLN2 that has a single deletion in the prosegment. The overall sequence identity for these enzymes is 81%, whereas the similarity is 92%. A pairwise comparison of the human and mouse enzymes yields 88% identity and 94% similarity, considerably higher than the median 78.5% identity reported for all identified mouse-human orthologs [13]. Thus, mammalian CLN2 appears to be a highly conserved enzyme.

Figure 1

Sequence comparisons of mammalian CLN2-like enzymes.These sequences correspond to the complete enzymes, including the prosegment. Residues forming the active site are shown in yellow on red background, other conserved residues identified as important for the stability of the enzyme are marked with yellow background, residues identical in at least 5 of the structures are green, and residues similar in their character are shown in magenta. The maturation cleavage point generating the N terminus of the active enzyme is marked with black triangles.

In addition to the mammals, CLN2-like enzymes are also found in fugu (puffer fish – unannotated record SINFRUP00000077297 in the NCBI fugu sequence database, ) and zebrafish (contig wz4596.2 in the zebrafish EST database, ). Only a fragment of the sequence of the latter enzyme agreed with the former. However, a few comparatively minor modifications can bring the zebrafish sequence into good agreement with that of the fugu CLN2. These modifications include a deletion of a single nucleotide from a run of three, as well as three insertions of repeated nucleotide pairs (Figure 2). It must be stressed that these modifications are speculative and may lead to prediction of several incorrect amino acids; however, they bring the two sequences into good global agreement (69% identities and 83% similarities).

Figure 2

Corrected gene sequence of the zebrafish CLN2.This putative sequence shows the manual corrections that bring it into alignment with the sequence of the fugu enzyme. Inserted nucleotides are marked in green and a deleted one in red.

The available amino acid sequence of the fugu CLN2 analog, named by us sedolisin-TPP [8], is also in good agreement with the sequences of the mammalian orthologs (Figure 3). The only major difference in the translated amino acid sequence compared to the mammalian and zebrafish enzymes is in the amino terminus of the propeptide region that is shorter by 30 amino acids (not shown). It is very likely that this represents a fault in the assembled sequence rather than a real variation, since the current coding frame is not initiated with a methionine, and a few extra residues are present in the full genomic sequence available from the fugu sequencing consortium .

Figure 3

Sequences of the catalytic domains of CLN2. Complete sequences are shown for CLN2 from human, fugu, and zebrafish, together with the partial sequence of putative CLN2 in Xenopus tropicalis. Residues identical in all four enzymes are colored green and those similar are colored magenta. Active site residues are marked as in Figure 1.

CLN2 is present not only in fish, but also in amphibians, in particular in Xenopus tropicalis (a species of frog). A partial sequence of its sedolisin-TPP (AL594774) found in the EST database  spans the middle part of the catalytic domain, without reaching the part of the active site closer to the N terminus that contains the aspartic and glutamic acids that belong to the catalytic triad. However, the sequenced part of the enzyme shows 75% identity with the fugu sedolisin-TPP, and 69% identity with human CLN2 (Figure 3). Sequence similarity to bacterial or fungal sedolisins is much lower, indicating that the enzyme found in frogs might also share the functional properties of the CLN2 subfamily.

The discovery of highly conserved CLN2-like enzymes not only in mammals but also in two fish species and one of frogs may indicate that these peptidases are universally present in the vertebrates, and that their important role identified in humans [2] and mice [14] might be a more general feature.

Modeling of the structure of human CLN2

The medical importance of CLN2 and the lack of a crystal structure inspired attempts at protein modeling. The first such model assumed that this enzyme is membrane-bound, with the sequence 271–294 (numbering corresponding to the mature enzyme, Figure 1) forming the putative transmembrane anchor [15]. However, in view of the subsequently obtained structures of the fully water-soluble sedolisins, this model was clearly incorrect. Exploiting the sequence similarity between CLN2, sedolisin, and kumamolisin (Figure 4), we have now used the experimentally obtained structures of the latter two enzymes to form a new, homology-derived model of human CLN2. The primary basis of the homology model was the structure of a complex of sedolisin with a covalently-bound inhibitor, pseudo-iodotyrostatin. Although it has not been directly shown that this compound can inhibit human CLN2, other similar peptides with an aldehyde functionality on their "C-termini" are weak, but detectable, inhibitors of this enzyme (Oda, unpublished). It is thus likely that pseudo-iodotyrostatin or a similar inhibitor might work for CLN2 as well, although the actual contacts between the inhibitor and the enzyme that are seen in the model have to be treated with caution. Another reason for the modeling of a pseudo-iodotyrostatin complex is that CLN2 is a tripeptidase, and that this inhibitor it represents the only experimental structure of a tripeptide analog bound to sedolisin.

Figure 4

Sequence alignment of bacterial and mammalian enzymes. Alignment of the sequences of sedolisin, kumamolisin, and human CLN2 used in the construction of the model of the latter enzyme. The colors scheme is the same as in Figure 2.

The r.m.s. deviation between the corresponding Cα coordinates of the model of CLN2 (Figure 5) and the experimental structure of sedolisin is about 1.75 Å, not much larger than the experimental difference between sedolisin and kumamolisin. Interestingly, the Cys327 and Cys342 residues in the model were found to be ideally positioned to form a disulfide bond even though this was not part of the design strategy. That this bond likely occurs in the real protein is suggested by the fact that these two cysteines are strictly conserved in all known animal species of CLN2 (Figures 1 and 3), although they are absent in all known sequences of bacterial sedolisins. Thus, if this disulfide were experimentally found to exist in CLN2 it would provide support for the correctness of the model.

Figure 5

A homology-derived model of human CLN2. Ribbon diagram of the Cα trace of CLN2, with the segments that were modeled based on the highly conserved core of sedolisin and kumamolisin (r.m.s. deviation of 1 Å) colored in red. Side chains of the residues that were found to be mutated in the genes of families of patients with late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis [17] are marked in ball-and-stick.

Comparisons of the substrate binding pockets of CLN2 and sedolisin

Since the principal known activity of CLN2 is that of a tripeptidase, it is expected that three substrate-binding pockets, S1 through S3 (using the nomenclature of Schechter and Berger [16]), should be discernible. Residues P1-P3 of the inhibitor that should occupy these pockets are shown in Figure 6. All the available structures of the complexes of either sedolisin or kumamolisin with inhibitors contain either a tyrosine or a phenylalanine occupying the S1 pocket. Parts of this pocket are fully conserved among different sedolisins, whereas other parts of it differ. The right-hand side of the pocket (in the view used in Figure 6) is made of the main chain including residues 164–165 (unless otherwise indicated, the numbering refers to the sequence of the mature human CLN2). This part of the main chain is held in place through a hydrogen-bonded interaction with the side chain of Thr279, part of the signature sequence SGTSAS surrounding the catalytic Ser280 and its equivalents in the other enzymes. Asp165 itself is also conserved since that residue provides the lining of the oxyanion hole, so it can be safely assumed that this part of the S1 pocket is virtually identical. No side chains point into the pocket from there, though, so its importance is limited to providing a steric barrier and excluding solvent. Another wall of the pocket is made up of the main chain of residues 130–132 that flank the conserved Gly131. Again, this part of the chain does not provide any specific interactions with the P1 residue of the substrate.

Figure 6

A model of the active site of human CLN2. The enzyme is shown in complex with pseudo-iodotyrostatin, a good inhibitor of the sedolisin family of peptidases. Only selected residues of the enzyme are explicitly shown on the background consisting of the molecular surface. The stick model of the inhibitor is colored gold and the P1-P3 residues are labeled in black. Similar views have been previously published for the experimentally-determined structures of sedolisin and kumamolisin [8]. The figure was prepared using the program DINO .

Considerable differences are seen, however, at the bottom of the pocket, where the side chains of Asp179 in kumamolisin and the equivalent Ser190 in sedolisin make hydrogen bonds to the P1 tyrosine of the inhibitor (if present). The equivalent residue in CLN2 is Thr182, but it is very unlikely that it can assume an orientation that would allow it to make a hydrogen bond to a P1 tyrosine. Other polar residues in the vicinity are Glu175 in sedolisin and the corresponding Asp169 in kumamolisin. However, the residue found here in CLN2 is Cys170, much less polar than its counterparts. There is also no equivalent to the polar interaction between Glu175 and Glu171 in sedolisin, since the equivalent of the latter residue in CLN2 is Ser166, much smaller and pointing away.

The side of the S1 pocket that is created by the very flexible side chain of Arg179 in sedolisin contains only a much smaller Ser174 in CLN2, and thus is much more open in the latter protein. This part of the pocket, with the main chain of the protein quite distant from the substrate, is indeed not well conserved in these proteins, with kumamolisin missing it entirely due to a deletion in the corresponding sequence position. In summary, the S1 pocket in CLN2 has less polar character than the equivalent pocket in the related proteins, and is lacking direct polar anchors for any side chains that might be present in the substrate.

The S2 pocket in CLN2 is also quite open and accessible to solvent. It is most likely larger than the equivalent pockets in either sedolisin or kumamolisin, since these are limited by Trp81 in the former and Trp129 in the latter (these residues originate from different parts of the backbone in the two enzymes and are not topologically related). Tyr130, an equivalent of the latter residue in CLN2, is unlikely to come into direct contact with the P2 residue of the substrate due to its greater distance (almost 4 Å for the closest atoms).

An important remaining puzzle is that the predicted structure of CLN2 does not show any clear limitations of the S3 pocket that could explain the tripeptidase activity of this enzyme. The location of the P3 side chain of the substrate is ambiguous, since it could point in either one of two directions by exchange with the N-terminal amine. The only negatively charged residue of CLN2 that is found in this vicinity is Asp132. Although in the current model the distance between its carboxylate and the nitrogen of the N-terminus of the modeled substrate is about 6 Å, these two groups could be brought into hydrogen-bonding range by some allowed changes in the torsion angles of the protein. Such a conformational change would involve breaking of the hydrogen bond between Asp132 and Ser139. However, this latter interaction is not likely to be structurally crucial since the serine is not absolutely conserved in all CLN2-like enzymes.

Location of mutations implicated in disease

Location of mutations found through a genetic survey of families of classic late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis patients has been described previously [17]. Most such mutations result in expression of either truncated enzyme or in incorrect intron-exon splices. However, some of the mutations lead to single amino acid substitutions in the mature enzyme. Such mutations include I92N, E148K, C170R and C170Y, V190D, G194E, Q227H, R252H, A259E, and S280L (Figure 5). Only the role of the latter mutation is completely clear, since it replaces the catalytic serine of CLN2 with a side chain that cannot support its enzymatic activity. No other residues appear to be located in the immediate vicinity of the substrate. Residues Val190, Gly194, and Arg252 are very highly conserved not only in CLN2 but also in other sedolisins and must play an important structural role. The reasons why the remaining mutations would lead to the loss of enzymatic activity are much less clear, but the wide distribution of these mutations in the structure supports the conclusion that any modifications to CLN2 that would abolish or impair its function could lead to the development of the disease.

Substrates and inhibitors of CLN2

Little is known at this time about biologically-relevant substrates of CLN2. Various defects that include truncations and single-site mutations in CLN2 have been found in the genes of patients that display symptoms of late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis [17]. One of the symptoms of the disease is the accumulation of an autofluorescent material, ceroid-lipofuscin, in lysosomal storage bodies in various cell types, primarily in the nervous system. Since a major component of such bodies appears to be intact subunit c of mitochondrial ATP synthase, this protein has been implicated as a potential biological target of the protease. It has been shown recently that CLN2 can indeed degrade this subunit on its N terminus [18], but the unambiguous proof that this is indeed the most important target is still lacking. CLN2 is capable of processing a number of different angiotensin-derived peptides [19], with the efficiency of cleavage dependent on the length of such peptides. The most efficiently processed peptide consisted of 14 amino acids, with the tripeptide Asp-Arg-Val removed from its N terminus. The model of CLN2 presented here can easily accommodate this peptide on the P side of the substrate-binding site, although the exact mode of binding of the long P' portion of the substrate remains obscure. The observation that an analogous peptide acetylated on its N terminus cannot be processed supports the postulate that the interactions of the N-terminal amino group with the side chain of Asp132 may be the most important feature defining the tripeptidase specificity of CLN2. A number of different tripeptides can be serially processed from glucagon, with their sequences varying widely [20]. Again, however, all of these tripeptides can be easily accommodated in the substrate-binding site of the CLN2 model. Other potentially biologically relevant substrates include cholecystokinin and possibly other neuropeptides [21].

An intriguing property of CLN2 is its reported ability to cleave collagen-related peptides [22]. The tripeptides resulting from such processing include Gly-Pro-Met, Gly-Pro-Arg, and Gly-Pro-Ala. It has been recently reported that kumamolisin, and particularly a closely related protein from Alicyclobacillus sendaiensis (kumamolisin-As) can efficiently cleave not only collagen-related peptides, but also native type I collagen [23]. With the substrate-binding site of CLN2 resembling that of kumamolisin more than sedolisin (the latter enzyme has low, if any, collagenase activity), the potential collagen-processing role of CLN2 might warrant further investigation.

Conclusions

Since the catalytic machinery of CLN2 matches closely that of sedolisin, kumamolisin, and other members of the family of serine-carboxyl peptidases, the enzymatic mechanism of all these enzymes is most likely the same. Design of inhibitors specific for CLN2 should incorporate the features that have been proven to be important for the related enzymes, such as the placement of an aldehyde functionality capable of making covalent interactions with the catalytic serine, or the utilization of chloromethyl ketone for the same purpose. Since the few inhibitors that have been successfully used in the studies of sedolisins are either longer than tripeptides or contain blocking groups on their N termini, new tripeptide-based inhibitors with free N termini are now being synthesized (Oda, unpublished). It will be necessary to test the binding properties of different substrates in order to determine the most promising peptide sequences. Analysis of the model of CLN2 suggests that the size of the S1 subsite is much larger than in either sedolisin or kumamolisin, and thus the use of a large P1 group might be indicated. Of course, the availability of an experimental crystal structure will make the design of inhibitors easier and we are continuing our efforts to crystallize CLN2 from different sources.

Methods

Homology modeling

Three-dimensional, atomic-scale models of CLN2 were developed by exploiting the sequence similarity to the sedolisin and kumamolisin proteins (r.m.s. deviation of 1.0 Å for 273 pairs of Cα atoms in the core of the enzymes). Presently, these two enzymes are the only members of the newly-defined sedolisin/serine-carboxyl peptidase family [8] for which the crystal structures have been published [5-7]. The actual Protein Data Bank [24]: ) entries used in the modeling were 1GA4.pdb and 1GT9.pdb for sedolisin and kumamolisin, respectively.

The first step was to form a global, multiple sequence alignment between all known members of the sedolisin family. Studies have shown that incorporating the specific patterns of amino acid residue-type variation and conservation among a family of homologous proteins provides superior results over simple, pair-wise sequence alignment [25]. Sequence files representing the different subfamilies were extracted from the non-redundant GenBank database [26] using sedolisin, kumamolisin, and the human CLN2 sequences as queries to the web-based version of the BLAST program [27]: . Initial multiple sequence alignments were formed with the ClustalX computer program [28]. As is expected for a family of proteins, highly-conserved segments were found aligned to the crystal structure-identified core regions of the sedolisin and kumamolisin sequences. Subsequently, the sequences were divided into two groups: those closer to sedolisin than kumamolisin and vise-a-versa. The alignment of these two groups was then manually set by the observed structural alignment of the sedolisin and kumamolisin proteins. Finally, some additional adjustment was required to correct the few places where highly conserved residues of the core regions were slightly out of alignment among different subfamilies of sequences.

The model of human CLN2 was built using the structure of sedolisin complexed with the inhibitor pseudo-tyrostatin [5,6] as a template. The reason for this choice is that while different protein models were generally comparable, the chosen inhibitor was most compatible with the tripeptidase character of CLN2. With the correspondence of residues specified in the alignments, atomic coordinates were transferred to the target sequence by a variety of methods, including the homology modeling modules of the Look/GeneMine [29] and DeepView [30] computer program packages. For the core and active site of the protein, coordinates for identical residues were simply transferred unchanged; whereas, special care was required to position the side chains of residues differing from the template. This was first accomplished automatically by the two computer packages, then manually adjusted in the Quanta molecular modeling package (Accelrys, Inc.) to better mimic the templates and optimize the interactions with surrounding residues. A similar two-step approach was used to manifest the insertions and deletions in the variable, loop regions of the protein, where it was necessary to create new backbone as well as side chain coordinates for the models. It should be noted that, for obvious reasons, the conformation of poorly conserved loop regions is generally the least accurate aspect of a homology model. Fortunately, these problematic loops will not significantly affect the active site of the model, since only two of them impinge on the boundary of this highly conserved, functional region.

Refinement and analysis of the model

The model was finished by performing energy minimization in vacuo with the computer program CHARMM [31]. This refined the structure by bringing the covalent geometry and non-bonded interactions into agreement with experimentally observed and calculated values. Such optimizations included adjusting bond lengths, 3-point angles and 4-point dihedral angles, as well as eliminating atomic overlap and forming salt-bridges and hydrogen bonds. Since presently the potential energy functions used to describe the atomic-scale models are not sufficiently comprehensive and accurate, the final energy of the model was not used as an indicator of the realistic quality of the structure. The final quality of the structure was analyzed with the computer program PROCHECK [32]. The structure was deposited at the PDB under accession code 1R60.

Authors' contributions

AW initiated this project and analyzed the genomic distribution of this family of enzymes. SRD contributed the modeling of the three-dimensional structure of CLN2. ML analyzed the model and compared it to the crystal structures of sedolisins. HO, KO and BMD contributed their experience gained from studies of serine-carboxyl peptidases and the design of their inhibitors, aimed at analysis of substrate-enzyme interactions and enzyme specificity. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements

Extensive discussions with Dr. A. Barrett (Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK) are gratefully acknowledged. Modeling efforts were facilitated by Dr. Robert Jernigan (Iowa State University). This work was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B), 15380072, from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (to K.O.); by NIH grants DK18865 and AI39211 (to B.M.D.); and in part with Federal funds from the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, under contract No. NO1-CO-12400. The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of Health and Human Services, nor does the mention of trade names, commercial products or organizations imply endorsement by the U. S. Government.Odorant receptor expressed sequence tags demonstrate olfactory expression of over 400 genes, extensive alternate splicing and unequal expression levels

Previous computational analyses have identified approximately 1,500 mouse olfactory receptors, but experimental evidence confirming olfactory function is available for very few receptors. A mouse olfactory epithelium cDNA library was screened to obtain olfactory receptor expressed sequence tags, providing evidence of olfactory function for many additional olfactory receptors, as well as identifying gene structure and putative promoter regions.

Abstract

Background

The olfactory receptor gene family is one of the largest in the mammalian genome. Previous computational analyses have identified approximately 1,500 mouse olfactory receptors, but experimental evidence confirming olfactory function is available for very few olfactory receptors. We therefore screened a mouse olfactory epithelium cDNA library to obtain olfactory receptor expressed sequence tags, providing evidence of olfactory function for many additional olfactory receptors, as well as identifying gene structure and putative promoter regions.

Results

We identified more than 1,200 odorant receptor cDNAs representing more than 400 genes. Using real-time PCR to confirm expression level differences suggested by our screen, we find that transcript levels in the olfactory epithelium can differ between olfactory receptors by up to 300-fold. Differences for one gene pair are apparently due to both unequal numbers of expressing cells and unequal transcript levels per expressing cell. At least two-thirds of olfactory receptors exhibit multiple transcriptional variants, with alternative isoforms of both 5' and 3' untranslated regions. Some transcripts (5%) utilize splice sites within the coding region, contrary to the stereotyped olfactory receptor gene structure. Most atypical transcripts encode nonfunctional olfactory receptors, but can occasionally increase receptor diversity.

Conclusions

Our cDNA collection confirms olfactory function of over one-third of the intact mouse olfactory receptors. Most of these genes were previously annotated as olfactory receptors based solely on sequence similarity. Our finding that different olfactory receptors have different expression levels is intriguing given the one-neuron, one-gene expression regime of olfactory receptors. We provide 5' untranslated region sequences and candidate promoter regions for more than 300 olfactory receptors, valuable resources for computational regulatory motif searches and for designing olfactory receptor microarrays and other experimental probes.

Background

The interaction of olfactory (or odorant) receptors with their odorant ligands is the first step in a signal transduction pathway that results in the perception of smell. The olfactory receptor gene family is one of the largest in the mammalian genome, comprising about 1,500 members in the mouse genome [1,2]. Olfactory receptors were originally identified in an elegant experiment based on the hypothesis that they would be seven-transmembrane-domain proteins encoded by a large, diverse gene family whose expression is restricted to the olfactory epithelium [3]. Subsequent studies have shown that some of these receptors do indeed respond to odorants and can confer that responsivity when expressed in heterologous cell types (for example [4]). Recent computational investigations have provided the almost complete human [5,6] and mouse [1,2] olfactory receptor-gene catalogs. However, the assignment of most of these genes as olfactory receptors is based solely on similarity to one of a relatively small number of experimentally confirmed mouse olfactory receptors or, worse, on similarity to a gene that in turn was defined as an olfactory receptor solely by similarity. While similarity-based genome annotation is a good initial method to identify genes and predict their function, in some cases it can be misleading, as genes of similar sequence can carry out different functions and be expressed in different tissues (for example, the sugar transporter gene family [7]).

A small subset of olfactory receptors appears to be expressed in non-olfactory tissues, principally the testis [8], but also taste tissues [9], prostate [10], erythroid cells [11], notochord [12] and perhaps other tissues. Expression in the testis has led some investigators to suggest that a subset of olfactory receptors may function as spermatid chemoreceptors [8]. Recent studies of one human testis-expressed olfactory receptor indicate that it does indeed function in sperm chemotaxis [13]. Due to the paucity of experimental evidence of the olfactory function of most genes in the family and suggestions of extra-olfactory roles, we embarked on an olfactory receptor expressed sequence tag (EST) project to confirm olfactory epithelial expression of hundreds of mouse odorant receptor genes.

Within the olfactory epithelium, individual olfactory receptor genes show an intriguing expression pattern. Each olfactory receptor is expressed in a subset of cells in one of four zones of the epithelium [14,15]. Furthermore, each olfactory neuron expresses only one allele [16] of a single olfactory receptor gene [17,18], and the remaining approximately 1,499 genes are transcriptionally inactive. While the mechanism ensuring singular expression is unknown, many hypotheses have been proposed [14,16,19]. In one model, somatic DNA recombination would bring one olfactory receptor gene into a transcriptionally active genomic configuration, as observed for the yeast mating type locus [20] and the mammalian immunoglobulin genes [21]. Alternatively, a second model invokes a combinatorial code of transcription factor binding sites unique to each gene. This is unlikely, however, as even olfactory receptor transgenes with identical upstream regions are expressed in different neurons [18]. In a third model, there would be a limiting quantity of transcription factors - the cell might contain a single transcriptional 'machine' that is capable of accommodating the promoter of only one olfactory receptor gene, similar to the expression site body used by African trypanosomes to ensure singular expression of only one set of variant surface glycoprotein genes [22]. Finally, in a fourth model, transcriptional activity at one stochastically chosen olfactory receptor allele might send negative feedback to repress activity of all other olfactory receptors and/or positive feedback to enhance its own expression. In the latter three models, some or all olfactory receptor genes might share transcription factor binding motifs, and in the first model, olfactory receptor genes might share a common recombination signal. In order to perform computational and experimental searches for such signals, it is important to have a better idea of the transcriptional start site of a large number of olfactory receptor genes. Our olfactory receptor EST collection provides 5' untranslated region (UTR) sequences for many genes and, therefore, a large dataset of candidate promoter regions.

Olfactory receptor genes have an intronless coding region, simplifying both computational and experimental olfactory receptor identification. For a small number of olfactory receptors, gene structure has been determined. Additional 5' untranslated exons lie upstream of the coding region and can be alternatively spliced [19,23-26]. The 3' untranslated region is typically intronless. Exceptions to this stereotyped structure have been described for some human olfactory receptors, but are thought to be rare [25-27]. cDNA identification and RACE data have been used to determine gene structure for about 30 genes, see, for example, [19,23]. However, computational prediction of the location of 5' upstream exons and the extent of the 3' UTR from genomic sequence has been extremely difficult. A combination of splice site predictions and similarity to other olfactory receptors has allowed some investigators to predict 5' exon locations for around 15 genes [25,28]. Experimental validation shows that some, but not all, predictions are accurate [24,25]. The total number of olfactory receptors for which gene structure is known is vastly increased by our study.

In this report, we describe the isolation and analysis of over 1,200 cDNAs representing 419 odorant receptor genes. We screened a mouse olfactory epithelium library with degenerate olfactory receptor probes and obtained 5' end sequences (ESTs) from purified cDNAs. These clones confirm olfactory expression of over 400 olfactory receptors, provide their gene structure, demonstrate that not all olfactory receptors are expressed at the same level and show that most olfactory receptor genes have multiple transcriptional isoforms.

Results

At least 419 mouse olfactory receptor genes are expressed in the olfactory epithelium

We have isolated 1,264 olfactory receptor cDNA clones, which together confirm the olfactory epithelial expression of 419 annotated olfactory receptor genes. We used low-stringency hybridization with degenerate olfactory receptor DNA probes to screen around 4,100,000 plaque-forming units (pfu) of an adult mouse olfactory epithelium cDNA library and around 640,000 pfu of an embryonic olfactory epithelium library. We obtained sequences from 1,715 hybridization-positive cDNAs following secondary screens to isolate single clones. Of these clones, 1,264 yielded olfactory receptor-containing sequences. The 26% false-positive rate is a consequence of using low-stringency hybridization to obtain maximal sensitivity. Continuing the screen would have resulted in cDNAs from additional olfactory receptors, but we reached a point of limiting returns: our final batch of 45 olfactory receptor-positive sequences represented 33 different olfactory receptors, of which only four had not been encountered previously in our screen.

Sequence analysis shows that the libraries are of high quality. Firstly, directional cloning was successful: only eight out of 1,430 cDNA sequences with any protein homology matched that protein on the reverse strand. Secondly, genomic contamination is rare: when the 83 olfactory receptor-containing sequences that had a 5' UTR of 400 bp or longer were aligned to genomic sequence, 80 spliced across at least one intron, leaving a maximum of three clones (3.6%) that potentially represent genomic contamination of the libraries. Thirdly, most clones are of a reasonable length: although we did not determine whether clones are full-length, 881 of 1,264 (70%) olfactory receptor cDNAs contain the gene's start codon and at least some 5' UTR sequence.

In order to match cDNAs to their genomic counterparts, first we updated our catalog of mouse olfactory receptor genes [1] based on Celera's most recent genome assembly (Release 13) [29]. Previous reports of the mouse olfactory receptor repertoire [1,2] were based on the Release 12 assembly. Release 13 consists of fewer, longer scaffold sequences containing fewer, smaller gaps than Release 12. Using the BLAST-based methods detailed previously [1], we identified 1,490 olfactory receptor sequences in the new assembly, including 1,107 intact olfactory receptor genes (compared to 866 intact olfactory receptors in the old assembly) reflecting the reduced sequence error rate and increased coverage of the new assembly (Table 1). We created a local database of genomic sequences including all olfactory receptor loci and 0.5 Mb flanking sequences (if available) and compared each cDNA sequence to this 'olfactory subgenome' database using sim4 [30].

cDNAs were assigned to individual genes based on their best match to an olfactory receptor coding region or its upstream region (see Materials and methods). Of the 1,264 olfactory receptor cDNAs, 1,176 matched a total of 419 olfactory receptor genes; the remaining cDNAs either matched an olfactory receptor below our 96% nucleotide identity threshold or had ambiguous matches encompassing more than one olfactory receptor gene region (see below).

A class I olfactory receptor degenerate primer broadens phylogenetic distribution of confirmed olfactory receptor genes

Previous analyses of the mammalian olfactory receptor family define two major phylogenetic clades, referred to as class I and II olfactory receptors, and suggest that class I olfactory receptors are more similar to fish olfactory receptors than are class IIs [5]. Figure 1 illustrates the phylogenetic diversity of our cDNA collection, showing that we have confirmed expression of at least one olfactory receptor gene in each major clade of the class II olfactory receptor genes, or 391 out of 983 (40%) of all intact class II olfactory receptor genes where full-length genomic sequence data are available (blue branches). The screen thus appears relatively unbiased in its coverage of class II olfactory receptors. However, our random screen provided cDNAs for only two out of 124 intact, full-length class I olfactory receptors. In an attempt to broaden the phylogenetic coverage of our hybridization screen, we used additional degenerate probes on the adult library and screened an embryonic library (Table 2). These experiments did not increase the diversity of clones identified (not shown).

This severe class I underrepresentation could be due to experimental bias - a consequence of using degenerate primers to create our hybridization probe. Alternatively, class I genes might be expressed at extremely low levels in the olfactory epithelium. In order to determine whether class I olfactory receptors are expressed in the olfactory epithelium, we designed a reverse-strand degenerate primer to recognize a motif in transmembrane domain 7 (PP{V/M/A/T}{F/L/I/M}NP) enriched among class I olfactory receptor sequences. Most of the motif is shared among all olfactory receptors, but the first proline residue (at the primer's 3' end) is found in 121 out of 124 (98%) intact class I genes compared to only 37 out of 983 (4%) intact class II genes. When combined with another olfactory receptor degenerate primer, P26 [17], this primer preferentially amplifies class I olfactory receptors from mouse genomic DNA: of 33 sequenced, cloned PCR products, 17 represented seven different class I olfactory receptors, six represented three different class II olfactory receptors, and ten represented five different non-olfactory receptor contaminants. Degenerate PCR, cloning, and sequencing from reverse-transcribed olfactory epithelium RNA showed that at least seven class I olfactory receptors are expressed, as well as one additional class II gene (colored red in Figure 1). However, no products could be obtained from the adult or the fetal olfactory epithelium cDNA libraries using the class I primer, suggesting that the libraries contain very low levels of class I olfactory receptors. We also confirmed expression of nine additional olfactory receptors (three class I and six class II, colored red in Figure 1) from subclades that were poorly represented in our cDNA screen using gene-specific primer pairs to amplify cDNA library or reverse-transcribed RNA templates.

For two of the class I genes we had shown to be expressed, we determined relative transcript levels using quantitative RT-PCR (see below). Expression levels were similar to those observed for genes that were represented in our cDNA collection, suggesting that class I olfactory receptors are not under-represented in the olfactory epithelium, and that the dearth of class I cDNAs in our screen is likely to be due to bias in the libraries and/or hybridization probes.

Some olfactory receptor genes are expressed at higher levels than others

Our cDNA screen suggests that some olfactory receptor genes are expressed at higher levels than others. If all olfactory receptor genes were expressed at equal levels, and our screen and library were unbiased in their coverage of the class II olfactory receptors, the number of cDNAs detected per class II olfactory receptor should follow a Poisson distribution, calculated based on the assumption that all 983 intact class II olfactory receptors have an equal chance of being represented in the screen, but that class I olfactory receptors and pseudogenes cannot be found (Figure 2). We calculate a low probability (approximately one in 28) that we would observe any gene with at least eight matching cDNAs in the set of 1,176 cDNAs we assigned to single olfactory receptor sequences. However, for 17 olfactory receptors, we found ten or more matching cDNAs, suggesting that they might be expressed at higher levels than other olfactory receptor genes (Figure 2). The two genes for which we found most cDNAs (AY318726/MOR28 and AY318727/MOR10) are genomically adjacent and in the well-studied olfactory receptor cluster next to the T-cell receptor α/δ locus [18,31].

Quantitative RT-PCR of six olfactory receptors confirms that expression levels do indeed vary considerably between genes. We used quantitative (real-time) PCR to measure olfactory epithelium transcript levels of six olfactory receptor genes and the ribosomal S16 gene in three mice of the same inbred strain (Figure 3). These genes include two olfactory receptors with more than 20 matching cDNAs, two with one or two matching cDNAs and two class I olfactory receptors with no matching cDNAs. In these assays, we measure transcript level per genomic copy of the gene by comparing how well a gene-specific primer pair amplifies reverse-transcribed RNA, relative to a standard curve of amplification of mouse genomic DNA. We find that expression levels can vary by almost 300-fold between genes (for example, genes A and D, Figure 3). However, cDNA numbers are not a good indicator of expression level, a discrepancy that is likely to be due to bias in the screen (we used degenerate primers to make the probes, which will favor some genes over others) and in the libraries (oligo-dT priming will favor genes with shorter 3' UTRs). For example, we observe large expression differences in all three mice between two genes for which similar numbers of cDNAs were found (genes A and B, Figure 3), and conversely, similar expression levels between two genes with a ten-fold difference in number of cDNAs found (genes B and C, Figure 3). Expression levels are mostly consistent between different mice: we find similar expression-level differences between olfactory receptor genes in all three mice examined (that is, the rank order of the six genes is similar among the three mice), although there is variation in expression level of some genes between mice (for example, gene E, Figure 3).

In situ hybridization (Figure 4) shows that increased numbers of expressing cells account for some, but not all, of the difference in transcript levels between two of the genes tested by real-time PCR (genes A and D in Figure 3). We hybridized alternate coronal serial sections spanning an entire olfactory epithelium of a young mouse (P6) with probes for gene A and gene D. Southern blot and BLAST analyses show that both probes are likely to hybridize to their intended target genes and no others (not shown). Gene A is expressed in zone 4 of the epithelium according to the nomenclature of Sullivan et al. [32] (Figure 4a). The expression pattern of gene D does not correspond to any of the four 'classical' olfactory epithelial zones [14,15,32]: positive cells are found in regions of endoturbinates II and III and ectoturbinate 3, resembling the expression pattern seen previously for the OR37 subfamily and ORZ6 olfactory receptors [33,34] (Figure 4b). Counting the total number of positive cells in alternate sections across the entire epithelium, we find that gene A is expressed in 2,905 cells, about 12 times more cells than gene D, which is expressed in a total of 249 cells. This 12-fold difference in numbers of expressing cells does not account for the almost 300-fold difference in RNA levels observed by real-time PCR, implying that the transcript level per expressing cell for gene A is about 25 times higher than transcript level in each expressing cell for gene D. We note that hybridization intensities per positive neuron appear stronger for gene A than gene D after comparable exposure times, in accordance with the idea that transcript levels are higher per cell. Thus, we suggest that expression in more cells and in higher levels per cell together account for the almost 300-fold higher olfactory epithelial RNA levels of gene A relative to gene D (Figure 3).

Most olfactory receptor genes have several transcriptional isoforms

Our cDNA collection reveals that at least two thirds of the olfactory receptors sampled show alternative splicing of their 5' untranslated exons. Using a custom script to process sim4 alignments of cDNA and genomic sequences, we find two to eight different splice forms for 85 (45%) of the 191 genes for which we have had some opportunity to observe alternate splicing (that is, a minimum of two cDNAs, at least one of which is spliced), and 55 (67%) of the 82 genes for which we have four or more cDNAs (and thus a higher chance of observing any alternate splicing) (Figure 5). These alternative splice events are almost all restricted to the 5' UTR and include exon skipping and alternate splice-donor and -acceptor use.

At least half of the olfactory receptors represented in our cDNA collection utilize more than one polyadenylation site, resulting in alternative 3' UTR isoforms. We have crudely estimated 3' UTR size for 1,169 cDNA clones by combining approximate insert size information with 5' sequence data. More than one 3' UTR isoform is predicted for 43 of the 77 (56%) genes for which there are at least four cDNAs with 3' UTR size information. We confirmed the alternative polyadenylation isoforms of four out of five selected genes by sequencing the 3' end of 14 cDNA clones. These 14 sequences also revealed one cDNA where the poly(A) tail was added 27 bp before the stop codon, and another where an intron was spliced out of the 3' UTR, contrary to the conventional stereotype of olfactory receptor gene structure.

A subset of olfactory receptors shows unusual splicing

We identified 62 cDNAs (5% of all olfactory receptor clones) from 38 intact olfactory receptors and one olfactory receptor pseudogene where a splice site within the protein-coding region is used. For two genes (top two cDNAs, Figure 6), the predicted protein appears to be an intact olfactory receptor with three or ten amino acids, including the initiating methionine, contributed by an upstream exon. A similar gene structure was described previously for a human olfactory receptor [25]. One of these two mouse genes has no start codon in its otherwise intact main coding exon. The unusual splicing thus rescues what would otherwise be a dysfunctional gene. In most cases (60 out of 62 cDNAs), the unusual transcript appears to be an aberrant splice form - the transcript would probably not encode a functional protein because the splice introduces a frameshift or removes conserved functional residues (Figure 6). For two clones (bottom two cDNAs, Figure 6), exon order in the cDNA clone is inconsistent with the corresponding genomic sequence. It is difficult to imagine what kind of cloning artefact resulted in these severely scrambled cDNAs: we suggest that they derive from real but rare transcripts. However, their low frequency in our cDNA collection suggests that splicing contrary to genomic organization does not contribute significantly to the olfactory receptor transcript repertoire. For 21 of the 26 genes for which unusually spliced cDNAs were found, we also observe an alternative ('normal') isoform that does not use splice sites within the coding region. (For the remaining 13 of the 3' genes showing odd splicing, we have identified only one cDNA so have not determined whether normal isoforms are present.)

We were intrigued both by previous reports of splicing of human olfactory receptors near the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) cluster, where several genes splice over long distances to a common upstream exon [26,27] and by the idea that olfactory receptor transcriptional control could be achieved by DNA recombination mechanisms, perhaps with the result that transcripts would contain some sequence from another locus. We therefore verified that the entire sequence of each olfactory receptor EST matches the corresponding gene's genomic 'territory' (defined for this purpose as from 1 kb after the preceding gene to 1 kb after the gene's stop codon). We found no cDNAs where introns encompassed other olfactory receptor genes, as reported for olfactory receptors in the human MHC region [26,27]. Six cDNAs do extend further than a single gene's 'territory' and appear not to be artifacts of the sequencing or analysis process. In each of these cases, the clones use splice sites within the 3' UTR and thus extend further than the arbitrary 1 kb downstream of the stop codon. Five of these six cDNAs also use splice-donor sites within the coding region and encode disrupted olfactory receptors (Figure 6). In the sixth cDNA, a 2.6-kb intron is spliced out of the 3' UTR, leaving the coding region intact.

If olfactory receptor transcriptional control is achieved by DNA recombination, the beginning of each transcript might derive from a donated promoter region, with the rest of the transcript coming from the native ORF-containing locus. In order to examine the recombination hypothesis, we analyzed 115 cDNA clones for which sim4 failed to align 20 bp or more to the corresponding genomic locus. In most cases, the missing sequence was explained by gaps in the genomic sequence or by matches that fell below our percent identity-based cutoff for reporting matches. For three cDNAs (from three different olfactory receptors), we found that the missing piece of sequence matched elsewhere in the genome. Comparison with the public mouse genome assembly confirmed the distant matches. With such a small number of cDNAs exhibiting a possible sign of DNA recombination (a sign that could also be interpreted as chimeric cDNA clones), we conclude that such rearrangement is unlikely to occur. However, the possibility remains that DNA recombination is responsible for olfactory receptor transcriptional regulation, with the donated region contributing only promoter sequences but no part of the transcript.

Both unclustered olfactory receptors and olfactory receptor pseudogenes can be expressed

We were interested in whether olfactory receptors need to be part of a cluster in the genome in order to be transcribed, or if the clustered genomic organization of olfactory receptors is simply a consequence of the fact that local duplication is the major mechanism for expanding the gene family [1]. 'Singleton' olfactory receptors (defined as full-length olfactory receptors without another olfactory receptor within 0.5 Mb) are more often pseudogenes than are olfactory receptors in clusters (8 out of 16 versus 271 out of 1,358; χ2 = 8.8, P < 0.005). Of the eight intact singleton olfactory receptors, two have matching cDNAs in our collection, a similar proportion as found for olfactory receptors in clusters, showing that clustering is not an absolute requirement for olfactory receptor expression. However, it is possible these two expressed singleton genes are part of 'extended' olfactory receptor clusters - their nearest olfactory receptor neighbors are 1.7 Mb and 2.6 Mb away, respectively.

We also find that some olfactory receptor pseudogenes are expressed, albeit with a lower probability than intact olfactory receptors. Considering the 1,392 olfactory receptor gene sequences for which reliable full-length data are available, 15 out of 285 (5%) apparent pseudogenes are represented in our cDNA collection, compared to 393 out of 1,107 (36%) intact olfactory receptors. However, three of these 15 'expressed pseudogenes' are intact genes in the public mouse genome sequence. The defects in Celera's version of these genes may be due to sequencing errors or true polymorphism. Publicly available mouse sequence confirms that 11 of the 12 remaining expressed pseudogenes are indeed pseudogenes. No public sequence matches the 12th 'expressed pseudogene' with 99% identity or more.

Discussion

We have identified and sequenced 1,264 odorant receptor cDNAs from 419 olfactory receptor genes, confirming their expression in the olfactory epithelium. We have thus validated the similarity-based prediction of over one-third of the intact olfactory receptor genes annotated in the mouse genome [1,2], thereby vastly increasing the proportion of the family for which experimental evidence of olfactory function is available. We have not found cDNAs for all olfactory receptor genes or an even phylogenetic distribution of cDNAs, probably because the libraries and/or our screen are biased toward certain olfactory receptor subfamilies. Using RT-PCR with both degenerate and specific primers, we have confirmed olfactory expression of a number of additional olfactory receptors, bringing the total number of olfactory receptor genes verified in this study to 436, and ensuring that almost all phylogenetic clades have at least one representative with evidence of olfactory function.

Results of our cDNA library screen suggested that some olfactory receptors are expressed at significantly higher levels than others. We used quantitative PCR to show that expression levels are indeed highly variable, with one olfactory receptor expressed at almost 300 times the level of another. Higher expression levels could be due to increased transcript number per cell and/or a greater number of olfactory neurons 'choosing' those genes. For one pair of genes we tested, expression level differences appear to be due to both factors. It would be interesting to collect data for additional genes to determine how the numbers of expressing cells and transcript levels per cell vary across the olfactory receptor family. Data from a number of previous studies also show that different olfactory receptor genes, or even copies of the same olfactory receptor transgene in different genomic locations are expressed in different numbers of cells [14,18,35], but do not address the issue of transcript level per cell. The fact that some genes are chosen more frequently, and when chosen may be expressed at higher levels per cell, is intriguing given each olfactory neuron's single-allele expression regime. The observation of unequal expression leads to a number of questions. It is known that each olfactory receptor is expressed in one of four zones of the olfactory epithelium [14,15]; do some zones choose from a smaller olfactory receptor sub-repertoire and thus express each olfactory receptor in a larger number of cells? We note that several apparently highly expressed olfactory receptors (gene A, this study, and MOR10 and MOR28 [36]) are expressed in zone 4 of the olfactory epithelium. Does activity-dependent neuronal competition [37] contribute to increased representation of the olfactory receptors that respond to common environmental odorants? Do the favored olfactory receptors have stronger promoter sequences? Are some olfactory receptor mRNAs more stable than others, leading to higher transcript levels per expressing cell? Are the favored olfactory receptors in more open chromatin conformation or more accessible genomic locations? Transcription of apparent 'singleton' olfactory receptor genes (0.5 Mb or more from the nearest other olfactory receptor gene) suggests that there is no absolute requirement for genomic clustering for an olfactory receptor to be transcribed, consistent with observations that small olfactory receptor transgenes can be expressed correctly when integrated outside native olfactory receptor clusters [35]. However, the high pseudogene count among singleton olfactory receptor genes (50%, versus 20% for clustered olfactory receptor genes) suggests that not all genomic locations are favorable for olfactory receptor gene survival, perhaps due to transcriptional constraints. It is also possible that evolutionary factors may be responsible for reduced pseudogene content of clustered olfactory receptors - gene conversion between neighboring olfactory receptors could rescue inactivating mutations in clustered genes, but not singletons. Before these questions about olfactory receptor gene choice can be answered, it will be important to measure expression levels of a larger number of genes, perhaps using an olfactory receptor gene microarray.

Our study provides at least partial data about the upstream transcript structures of over 300 olfactory receptor genes. These data provide tentative locations of a large set of promoter regions, allowing computational searches for shared sequence motifs that might be involved in the intriguing transcriptional regulation of olfactory receptors. However, given that not all cDNAs are full-length clones, some of these candidates will not be true promoter regions. The 5' UTR sequences we obtained will also aid in the design of experimental probes, for example, for in situ hybridizations or to immobilize on an olfactory receptor microarray. One of the challenges of such an array will be to design unique probes with which to represent each gene. Often, the coding region of olfactory receptors is highly similar between recently duplicated genes. Many pairs of similar olfactory receptors show more sequence divergence in the UTRs than the protein-coding region (J.Y., unpublished observations). The UTRs would therefore make a better choice of sequence from which to design unique oligonucleotides to distinguish closely related olfactory receptor genes. Locations of these regions in genomic sequence are difficult to predict - our study provides 5' UTR sequences of 343 genes and the approximate 3' UTR length for 399 olfactory receptor genes. Probe design must also account for the multiple transcriptional isoforms observed for many olfactory receptors - depending on the question being asked, probes could be designed in shared sequence to determine the total level of all isoforms, or in unique exons to measure the level of each isoform separately.

We find that the majority of the olfactory receptors, like most non-olfactory receptor genes [38,39], are transcribed as multiple isoforms, involving alternative splicing of 5' untranslated exons and alternate polyadenylation-site usage. The act of splicing itself may be important for efficient mRNA export from the nucleus [40] or to couple olfactory receptor coding regions with genomically distant promoters. The exact nature of the spliced transcript might be unimportant, such that several isoforms might be produced simply because multiple functional splice sites are available. Alternatively, the multiplicity of transcriptional isoforms might have functional significance, as UTRs may contain signals controlling mRNA stability, localization or degradation [41,42].

Our study shows that about 5% of olfactory receptor transcripts do not fit the current notion of olfactory receptor gene structure. Occasionally, an intron is spliced out of the 3' untranslated region. A number of cDNAs use splice sites within the olfactory receptor's ORF, meaning that their protein product is different from that predicted on the basis of genomic sequence alone. In two such cases, the transcript would encode a functional olfactory receptor, with the initiating methionine and first few amino acids encoded by an upstream exon, as has been observed previously for a subtelomeric human olfactory receptor gene [25]. Such within-ORF splicing might increase protein-coding diversity, although, given the small number of genes involved, splicing is unlikely to significantly affect the functional receptor repertoire. Most of the atypical splice forms we observe appear to encode non-functional transcripts, containing frameshifts or lacking a start codon or other functional residues conserved throughout the olfactory receptor family. These nonfunctional transcripts are probably aberrant by-products of the splicing system [43] that have not yet been degraded by RNA surveillance systems [40,41]. The neurons expressing these aberrant transcripts might also make normal transcripts for the same genes and thus produce a functional olfactory receptor. Alternatively, the unusual transcriptional regulation of olfactory receptors might ensure that only one splice isoform is expressed per cell (unlikely, but possible if an RNA-based feedback mechanism operates), thus condemning cells expressing these aberrant isoforms to be dysfunctional.

We also observe transcripts from a small number of olfactory receptor pseudogenes, as previously described for three human olfactory receptor pseudogenes [26,44]. Although many fewer pseudogenes than intact genes were represented in our cDNA collection, some neurons in the olfactory epithelium evidently express disrupted olfactory receptors and thus might be unable to respond to odorants or to correctly innervate the olfactory bulb. Wang, Axel and coworkers have shown that an artificial transgenic olfactory receptor gene containing two nonsense mutations can support development of an olfactory neuron, but that pseudogene-expressing neurons fail to converge on a glomerulus in the olfactory bulb [45]. By analogy with an olfactory receptor deletion mutant [45], it is likely that most pseudogene-expressing neurons die or switch to express a different olfactory receptor gene, leaving a small number of pseudogene-expressing neurons in adult mice, but at greatly reduced levels compared to neurons expressing intact olfactory receptors.

Conclusions

Our study has provided an olfactory receptor cDNA resource representing over one-third of the olfactory receptor gene family. We have thus established over 400 annotated olfactory receptor genes as having olfactory function. The sequences we generated demonstrate that the majority of the olfactory receptor gene family has multiple transcriptional isoforms. Most olfactory receptor transcripts encode functional receptor proteins, with rare exceptions. We show that individual olfactory receptor genes can have vastly different expression levels, an intriguing finding in light of the unusual one-neuron one-gene transcriptional regime of the olfactory epithelium. Our results and the sequences we provide will facilitate future global studies of the mechanisms and dynamics of olfactory receptor gene expression.

Materials and methods

Identification of olfactory receptor cDNAs

An adult mouse cDNA library made from the olfactory epithelium of a single animal was provided by Leslie Vosshall (Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA), and an embryonic library (made from the olfactory epithelia of several E16.5-E18.5 embryos) was provided by Tyler Cutforth (Columbia University, New York, NY, USA). Both libraries were oligo-dT primed and directionally cloned into the lambdaZAP-XR vector (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA). The adult library has a complexity of 6.5 × 106 primary clones, and the embryonic library has a complexity of 1.65 × 106. Libraries were amplified to give titers of 5 × 109 pfu/ml (adult) or 2 × 1010 pfu/ml (embryonic). Hybridization probes were made by degenerate PCR of mouse genomic DNA, in a fashion similar to those described previously [1], with primer pairs and annealing temperatures given in Table 2. Low-stringency hybridization conditions were as described [1]. Clonally-pure plaques were obtained through secondary screens using the same probe as the corresponding primary screen. PCR with vector primers (M13F/R) was performed to prepare sequencing templates. cDNA size estimates were obtained by agarose gel electrophoresis, and inserts were sequenced from the 5' end using the M13R primer and big-dye terminator chemistry according to ABI's protocols (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). In order to obtain 3' sequence, selected phage clones were converted to plasmid stocks following a scaled-down version of Stratagene's in vivo excision protocol. Plasmid DNA gave better 3'-end sequence than PCR products, which often suffered from polymerase stuttering through the poly(A) tract.

cDNA sequences and associated information are available through dbEST (Genbank accessions CB172832-CB174569) and our olfactory receptor database [46]. The updated olfactory receptor gene catalog is available through Genbank (accessions AY317244-AY318733). Throughout the manuscript, genes are referred to by their Genbank accession numbers.

Sequence analysis

cDNA sequences were base-called and quality-trimmed using phred (trim_cutoff = 0.05) [47], and vector sequences were removed using cross_match [48]. Any sequences of less than 50 bp after trimming were discarded. 3' UTR lengths were estimated by combining approximate insert sizes determined by PCR with 5' sequence data where possible (if the 5' sequence did not extend into the coding region we could not estimate 3' UTR size). We counted cDNAs from a given gene as showing alternative polyadenylation site usage if 3' UTR length estimates varied by at least 400 bp - smaller variation could be real, but may not be distinguishable from error in our size estimates.

To assign cDNAs to their corresponding olfactory receptor genes, we first defined a genomic 'territory' for each gene, with the following attributes: strand, start position (100 kb upstream of the start codon or 1 kb after the previous gene upstream on the same strand, whichever is closer) and end position (1 kb downstream of the stop codon). Trimmed sequences were compared with genomic sequences using sim4 [30] (settings P = 1 to remove polyA tails and N = 1 to perform an intensive search for small exons). The sim4 algorithm uses splice-site consensus sequences to refine alignments. Only matches of 96% or greater nucleotide identity were considered. RepeatMasked sequences [49] were also compared to genomic sequences; cDNA:genomic sequence pairings not found in both masked and unmasked alignments were rejected. Coordinates from the unmasked alignment were used for further analysis. Any cDNA sequence matching entirely within a territory was assigned to that gene. If a cDNA matched more than one gene territory, the best match was chosen (that is, the one with highest 'score', where score is the total of all exons' lengths multiplied by their respective percent identities). We found 27 cDNAs that spanned a larger genomic range than one gene territory and flagged them for more careful analysis. Of these, six cDNAs showed unusual splicing within the 3' UTR, but the remaining 'territory violators' were found to be artifacts of the analysis process which fell into three types. These included: cDNAs where the insert appeared to be cloned in the reverse orientation (six cDNAs); sequences from recently duplicated gene pairs, where sim4 assigned coding region and upstream exons to different members of the pair, although exons could equally well have been aligned closer to one another (six cDNAs); and artifacts due to use of sim4's N = 1 parameter (nine cDNAs). This parameter instructs the program to make extra effort to match small upstream exons, allowing a greater total length of EST sequence to be matched. However, occasionally the N = 1 parameter caused the program to assign very small sequences (1-4 bp) to distant upstream exons, when they probably match nearer to the corresponding coding sequence.

The expected distribution shown in Figure 2 was calculated using the equation P(x) = e-μμx/x!, where P(x) is the Poisson probability of observing x cDNAs per gene, and μ is the mean number of cDNAs observed per gene (μ = 1,176/983: 1,176 cDNAs matching olfactory receptor genes in our dataset and 983 intact class II olfactory receptors). In our analysis of expressed pseudogenes, we ignored two olfactory receptor pseudogenes found very near the ends of genomic sequences and thus likely to be error-prone. A protein sequence alignment of intact mouse olfactory receptors was generated using CLUSTALW [50], edited by hand, and used to produce the phylogenetic tree shown in Figure 1 using PAUP's neighbor-joining algorithm (v4.0b6 Version 4, Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA). The tree was colored using a custom script. Information content (the measure of sequence conservation shown in Figure 6) was calculated for each position in the alignment using alpro [51].

To determine the number of transcriptional isoforms for each gene, we examined the sim4 output for every matching cDNA in decreasing order of number of exons. The first cDNA was counted as one splice form, and for each subsequent cDNA, we determined whether exon structure was mutually exclusive to isoforms already counted. We were conservative in our definition of mutually exclusive, and thus our count represents the minimum number of isoforms represented in the cDNA collection.

RT-PCR

The olfactory epithelia were dissected from three adult female C57BL/6 mice, including tissues attached to the skull and septum. RNA was isolated using the Qiagen RNeasy midi kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), including a DNase treatment step. First-strand cDNA was produced from 2.5 μg of RNA in a volume of 50 μl using random hexamers and Invitrogen's Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer's recommendations. One-twenty-fifth of the resulting cDNA was used as template in subsequent PCR reactions. PCR amplification biased towards class I olfactory receptors was performed using degenerate primers P26 [17] and classI_R1 (5'-GGRTTIADIRYIGGNGG-3') with an annealing temperature of 44°C. The product was cloned (TA cloning kit, Invitrogen), and individual clones were sequenced. Specific PCR primers used to confirm expression of individual olfactory receptor genes are given in Additional data file 1. Each PCR product was sequenced to confirm that the expected gene and no others had been amplified. Control reactions on a template made by omitting reverse transcriptase gave no product, indicating that the RNA preparation was uncontaminated by genomic DNA.

Relative transcript levels were estimated using real-time PCR according to Applied Biosystems' protocols, with magnesium concentration, primer pair and fluorescent probe given in Additional data file 2. The increase in fluorescence during thermocycling was measured on an ABI PRISM 7900HT. Standard curves were constructed for each primer pair using triplicate samples of mouse genomic DNA of nine known concentrations (range 0.01-100 ng, or about 3-30,000 copies of the haploid genome). Relative expression level of each gene was determined by comparing the mean Ct (cycle where fluorescence reaches an arbitrary threshold value) obtained with six replicate samples of reverse-transcribed RNA to the standard curve for the corresponding primers. Relative RNA levels of a housekeeping gene, ribosomal S16, were measured as previously described [52]. Control reactions on template prepared by omitting reverse transcriptase amplified at a relative level of 0.03 ± 0.01 ng or less in each case. Expression measurements of the seven genes were normalized for each mouse so that S16 levels were equal to 1 (arbitrary units).

In situ hybridization

Coronal sections were cut from the olfactory epithelia of an adult mouse (Figure 4) and a young (P6) C57BL/6 mouse. RNA in situ hybridization was carried out as described previously [15,53] with digoxigenin-labeled antisense riboprobes specific for the 3' UTRs of genes AY318555 (0.5 kb) and AY317365 (0.5 kb). Riboprobe sequences were generated by PCR using primer pairs 5'-TCTTCCAAACCTGGACCCCCC-3' and 5'-ATCTCTCCAGCACCTTACTTG-3' for AY318555 and primer pairs 5'-TAAGATGTAAGTGATAATTTAGATTACAGG-3' and 5'-TTTCTGCCTCAGCTATGACAG-3' for AY317365. Hybridization was carried out in 50% formamide at 65°C, and slides were washed at high stringency (65°C, 0.2 × SSC). The probes each hybridize to only one band on a Southern blot, indicating that each probe only detects one olfactory receptor gene. BLAST analyses show that the AY318555 probe is unique in Celera's mouse genome assembly (Release 13), and that the AY317365 probe is similar to only one other genomic region. This potential cross-hybridizing region is over 10 Mb from the nearest olfactory receptor coding region and is thus highly unlikely to be included in any olfactory receptor transcript. Low-power images are composed of three overlapping micrographs (40×) assembled in Adobe Photoshop 7.0.

Additional data files

A list of the primers used to confirm the expression of olfactory receptor genes by RT-PCR and PCR from cDNA library templates can be found in Additional data file 1. The experimental conditions used for real-time PCR can be found in Additional data file 2.

Supplementary Material

Additional data file 1

A list of the primers used to confirm the expression of olfactory receptor genes by RT-PCR and PCR from cDNA library templates

Click here for additional data file

Additional data file 2

The experimental conditions used for real-time PCR

Click here for additional data file

Acknowledgements

We thank Leslie Vosshall and Tyler Cutforth for providing cDNA libraries, staff of the core facilities at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center and the University of Washington's former Department of Molecular Biotechnology for sequencing assistance, Linda Buck and Michael Schlador for comments on the manuscript and Colin Pritchard for S16 primers. The data in this paper were analyzed in part through use of the Celera Discovery System™ and Celera Genomics' associated databases. This work was supported by NIH grant R01 DC04209.

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Olfactory receptor genes whose expression in the mouse olfactory epithelium was confirmed in this study. Genes whose expression has been confirmed by our cDNA screen are colored blue on a phylogenetic tree of 1,107 intact mouse olfactory receptors. Genes whose expression was confirmed by PCR methods are colored red (genes listed in Additional data file 1 were confirmed by specific PCR of the cDNA library or reverse-transcribed RNA, and genes confirmed using the class I degenerate primer for RT-PCR are AY317681, AY317698, AY317700, AY317767, AY317773, AY317774, AY317797 and AY317923). Other olfactory receptors are colored gray, and a chemokine outgroup is colored black. Class I olfactory receptors are bracketed, and the remaining olfactory receptors are class II.

Figure 2

The cDNA screen suggests different expression levels for different olfactory receptors. Distribution of number of cDNAs observed (dots) and expected (triangles, line) per olfactory receptor gene among 1,176 olfactory receptor cDNAs identified, based on a Poisson distribution.

Figure 3

Differential expression levels among six olfactory receptor genes determined by quantitative PCR. (a) Expression levels of olfactory receptor genes can vary by almost 300-fold (for example, genes A and D). Relative expression levels of six selected olfactory receptor genes (A, AY318555; B, AY318107; C, AY318644; D, AY317365; E, AY317773; and F, AY317797) were determined in olfactory epithelium RNA samples from three mice. Expression levels for each gene were first determined relative to a standard curve made using mouse genomic DNA templates, and then values for each mouse were normalized so that a housekeeping gene, ribosomal S16, had a value of 1 (arbitrary units) (not shown). Error bars show one standard deviation (six replicate reactions). Genes E and F (AY317773 and AY317797) are class I olfactory receptors. Numbers of cDNAs observed in our screen are shown under each gene name. (b) Expression levels of each gene are similar, with some variation, among the three mice sampled. Graphs show pairwise comparisons between the three mice sampled, with relative expression levels (arbitrary units) in one mouse plotted along the x-axis and in a second on the y-axis.

Figure 4

Olfactory receptors showing different expression levels. Different expression levels of one pair of olfactory receptors is due to different numbers of expressing cells and different transcript levels per cell. RNA in situ hybridization with digoxigenin-labeled probes for (a) gene A (AY318555) and (b) gene D (AY317365) on coronal sections of the olfactory turbinates of an adult mouse, shown at low magnification and inset (boxed) at high magnification. Endoturbinates II and III and ectoturbinate 3 are labeled in (b).

Figure 5

Many olfactory receptor genes show alternate splicing. Distribution of the number of transcriptional isoforms observed for the 82 olfactory receptors for which we have identified at least four cDNAs.

Figure 6

Sixty-two olfactory receptor cDNAs use splice sites within the coding region. The bar at the top represents an alignment of all olfactory receptor proteins, with transmembrane (TM) regions shaded gray and intracellular (IC) and extracellular (EC) loops in white. Above the bar, the jagged line plots information content [51] for each alignment position, with higher values representing residues conserved across more olfactory receptors. cDNAs with atypical splicing are plotted below, aligned appropriately to the consensus representation. Genbank accessions for each cDNA are shown on the right, and where more than one clone represents the same isoform, both names are given, but a composite sequence is drawn. Multiple isoforms from the same gene are grouped by gray background shading. Thick black lines represent cDNA sequence, and thin lines represent intronic sequence (with diagonal slash marks if not drawn to scale). The uppermost two cDNAs encode potentially functional olfactory receptors. A single cDNA drawn as white boxes (CB173065) is cloned into the vector in the reverse orientation. Introns that result in a frameshift relative to the olfactory receptor consensus are drawn as single dashed lines. The first in-frame methionine in the cDNA is marked with an 'M', and the first stop codon 5' to this methionine (if any) is marked with *. Most sequences are incomplete at the 3' end, as represented by paired dotted lines, although two sequences (CB174400 and CB174364), marked with '(A)n', contain the cDNA's poly(A) tail. The 'X' on sequence CB173500 marks an exon that does not align with genomic sequence near the rest of the gene or anywhere else in Celera's mouse genome sequence, and 'TM4' on sequence CB172879 notes an exon that matches to the reverse-complement of the fourth transmembrane domain of the next downstream olfactory receptor gene. For the two lowermost cDNAs, exon order in the cDNA clone is inconsistent with the corresponding genomic sequence, as represented by the curved intron lines.

Table 1

Number of olfactory receptors in old (Release 12) and new (Release 13) Celera mouse genome assemblies

Table 2

Summary of cDNA screen for each library and probe.

Probe names comprise the names of the two primers and the annealing temperature used during PCR to generate the probes, separated by underscoresMolecular cloning and characterization of the mouse Acdp gene family

Abstract

Background

We have recently cloned and characterized a novel gene family named ancient conserved domain protein (ACDP) in humans. To facilitate the functional study of this novel gene family, we have cloned and characterized Acdp, the mouse homologue of the human ACDP gene family.

Results

The four Acdp genes (Acdp1, Acdp2, Acdp3 and Acdp4) contain 3,631 bp, 3,244 bp, 2,684 bp and 2,743 bp of cDNA sequences, and encode deduced proteins of 951, 874, 713 and 771 amino acids, respectively. The mouse Acdp genes showed very strong homologies (>90%) in both nucleotide and amino acid sequences to their human counterparts. In addition, both nucleotide and amino acid sequences within the Ancient Conserved Domain (ACD) are highly conserved in many different taxonomic species. Particularly, Acdp proteins showed very strong AA homologies to the bacteria CorC protein (35% AA identity with 55% homology), which is involved in magnesium and cobalt efflux. The Acdp genes are widely expressed in all tissues tested except for Acdp1, which is only highly expressed in the brain with low levels of expression in kidney and testis. Immunostaining of Acdp1 in hippocampus neurons revealed a predominant localization on the plasma membrane.

Conclusion

The Acdp genes are evolutionarily conserved in diverse species and ubiquitously expressed throughout development and adult tissues suggesting that Acdp may be an essential gene. Acdp showed strong homology to bacteria CorC protein and predominantly localized on the plasma membrane. These results suggest that Acdp is probably a family of proteins involved in ion transport in mammalian cells

Background

We have recently cloned and characterized a novel gene family named ancient conserved domain protein (ACDP) which encodes four protein members in humans [1]. We found that this gene family is evolutionarily conserved in diverse species ranging from bacteria, yeast, C. elegans, and D. melanogaster to mammals. The sequence conservation and the presence of multiple members within a species may imply functional importance associated with the genes. To facilitate the functional analysis of the ACDP gene family, we cloned and characterized Acdp, the mouse homologue of the human ACDP gene family.

Results

Molecular cloning of the Acdp gene family

To clone the mouse Acdp genes, the human ACDP cDNA and predicted protein sequences were used to search the mouse EST database with the blastn and tblastn programs. Mouse EST markers corresponding to each Acdp member were then identified. For example, EST H3086H12-5 corresponds to Acdp1, W98010 for Acdp2, 603299135F1 for Acdp3 and BG083791 for Acdp4. A modified oligo-dT with a M13 tail was used for the RT reaction. A forward primer from each EST marker and the M13 primer (olig-dT tail) were used to amplify the 3' UTR sequence for each corresponding Acdp gene from the RT products. To obtain 5'-end coding sequences for the Acdp genes, we conducted a series nested PCR with combinations of mouse and human primers. The 5' UTR sequences were identified by directly sequencing BAC DNA containing the corresponding Acdp genes. The BAC clones were identified by screening a CITB mouse BAC DNA library (Research Genetics). The 5' UTR sequences obtained from above were further confirmed by RT-PCR. The Acdp1 gene contains 3,631 bp of nucleotide sequence and encodes a predicted protein with 951 amino acids (AA). The other three Acdp genes (Acdp2, 3 and 4) contain 3,244 bp, 2,684 bp and 2,743 bp of cDNA sequences, and encode deduced proteins of 874 amino acids, 713 amino acids and 771 amino acids, respectively.

Tissue distribution

Northern blot analyses of the Acdp gene family were carried out using membranes purchased from Origene. A total of 12 mouse tissues were included in the study (Fig. 1). Due to sequence homologies between each Acdp member within the conserved domain, probes for Northern bolts were PCR fragments from the last exon and the 3' untranslated region sequences. The mouse Acdp messages showed almost the same tissue distributions as the human ACDP genes. Acdp1 message is highly expressed in the brain, while kidney and testis also showed low levels of expression. Acdp2 showed higher expressions in the brain, kidney and liver. However, the Acdp2 transcript was not present in the skeleton muscle and skin, and it showed very low levels of expression in the rest of tissues. Acdp3 and Acdp4 showed different levels of expression in all tissues tested; the highest expressions for Acdp3 were observed in the brain, kidney, liver and heart, and the highest expressions for Acdp4 were observed in the kidney, small intestine and testis. The expression levels for Acdp3 and 4 in skeleton muscle were barely detectable; however, β-actin showed normal expression suggesting that the results were not a consequence of bad RNA quality (data not shown). The ubiquitous expression pattern may be taken as another indication of the functional importance of Acdp proteins in fundamental biological processes in addition to the sequence conservation in evolutionarily divergent species.

Figure 1

Northern blot analyses of the Acdp gene family. S. muscle represents skeletal muscle, Sm. Int. represents small intestine. Multiple Choice Northern Blot filters were purchased from Origene.

Chromosomal location

Radiation hybrid mapping indicated that the Acdp1 gene maps to chromosome 19 between markers D19Mit119 (34.3 cR proximal)and D19Mit112 (13.6 cR distal). The Acdp2 gene maps slightly more distal to the Acdp1 on chromosome 19 between D19Mit9 (2.4 cR proximal) and D19Mit38 (15.1 cR distal). The Acdp3 and Acdp4 genes map to chromosome 1 within one BAC clone (RP23-294I17), proximal to marker D1Mit171 (17.4 cR). These regions are syntenic to the human counterparts.

Sequence homology and molecular characteristics

The mouse Acdp genes showed very strong homologies of both nucleotide and AA sequences to the human ACDP genes (Table 1). The highest homologies were observed between the human ACDP2 and the mouse Acdp2 gene (91% of nucleotide identity, 97% of AA identity and 99.4% of AA homology). In addition, the 5' UTR nucleotide sequences (20 bp of nucleotides before start codon) also showed high homologies to the human homologs, for example, the Acdp2 5' UTR sequence showed 95% identities to its human homolog. However, the homologies in the 3' UTR sequences (20 bp of nucleotides after stop codon) were much lower (40–55%) for all Acdp genes except Acdp4 (90% identity to its human homolog). The ancient conserved domain (ACD) has 55.3% of AA identity and 83.3% of homology between all mouse and human ACDP proteins (Fig. 2). The ACD domain is evolutionarily conserved in divergent species ranging from bacteria, yeast, C. elegans, D. melanogaster, mouse to human (Fig. 3). Particularly, as shown in Fig. 3, Acdp proteins showed very strong AA homology to bacteria CorC protein (35% AA identity with 55% homology), which is involved in magnesium and cobalt efflux [7]. High AA homology was also observed between the Acdp proteins and the yeast Amip3 protein (35% AA identity with 56% homology). The Amip3 is likely to be a homologous to the bacteria CorC protein. The Amip3 mutants confer resistance to copper toxicity (Personal communication with Dr. V.C. Culotte, John Hopkins Bloomberg, School of Public Health). The evolutionary relationships among those proteins are illustrated by a phylogenetic tree constructed based on the AA homology of proteins (Fig. 4).

Table 1

Nucleotide and amino acid homologies (%) between human ACDP and mouse Acdp members.

Figure 2

Amino acid sequence homology alignment for all of the ACDP and Acdp genes within the ACD domain. The sequence data for the Acdp genes have been deposited in GenBank under accession number AF202994 (Acdp1), AF216961 (Acdp2), AF216964 (Acdp3) and AF216963 (Acdp4). Identical amino acids or amino acids with very strong homologies among all proteins were shaded black. Identical amino acids or amino acids with very strong homologies in most of the proteins were shaded grey. Dot lines represent gaps for the alignment.

Figure 3

Amino acid sequence alignment showing the conservation of ACD domain in various species. Amip3 is a protein from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (NP_014581). CanG is a protein from Candida glabrata (AAF33142). NeuC (EAA31204) is a hypothetical protein from Neurospora crassa. DroM is a gene product from D. melanogaster. The accession number for this gene is CG40084 in BDGP (Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project). AnoG represents a protein from the anopheles gambiae str. (EAA01004). CaeE (AAK77203) is a hypothetical protein from the Caenohabditis elegans. CorC represents bacteria magnesium and cobalt efflux protein from the Shewanella oneidensis. XyFD is a hypothetical protein from the Xylella fastidiosa Dixon (ZP_00038107).

Figure 4

Phylogenetic tree showing relationships among proteins containing the ACD domain from figure 2 and 3. The phylogenetic tree was constructed according to the calculation of the best match for the selected sequences. Abbreviations for each protein are the same as presented in figure 3.

We found that all mouse Acdp members contain four distinct transmembrane domains (Fig. 5), two CBS domains and a DUF21 domain that are found in bacteria CorC and yeast Amip3 proteins. CBS domains are small intracellular modules that are mostly found in 2 or four copies within a protein. Pairs of CBS domains dimerise to form a stable globular domain [8]. DUF21 (CD: pfam01959.9) is a newly defined domain with unknown function. This domain is a transmembrane region and found to be located in the N-terminus of the proteins adjacent to two intracellular CBS domains . A cNMP-binding domain (cyclic nucleotide-monophosphate-binding domain) was found in all Acdp members.

Figure 5

Four transmembrane domains within Acdp4 protein. Transmembrane domains were predicted by the TMHMM program . The plot shows the posterior probabilities of inside /outside/TM helix. At the top of the plot (between 1 and 1.2) the N-best prediction is shown. The plot is obtained by calculating the total probability that a residue sits in helix, inside, or outside summed over all possible paths through the model.

In addition, Acdp1 contains an Alanine-rich region (2–10: AAAAAAAAA), a Leucine-rich region (204–257: LLRVRPRLYGPGGDLLPPAWLRALGALLLLALSALF SGLRLSLLSLDPVELRVL), a Proline-rich region (78–130: PGPPVPAAPVPAPSLA PGENGTGDWAPRLVFIEEPPGAGGAAPSAVPTRPPGP), and two amidation sites (917–920: MGKK; 926–929: SGRK). Acdp2 has a glycine-rich region (201–222: GAGGSGSASGTVGGKGGAGVAG). Acdp3 possesses a large alanine-rich region (2–261) and a large leucine-rich region (201–299). Acdp4 contains a leucine zipper pattern (185–206: LVMVLLVLSGIFSGLNLGLMAL) and an amidation site (7–10: GGRR).

Antibody production, Western results and subcellular localization

Peptides from Acdp1 N- (TSFLLRVYFQPGPPATAAPVPSPT) and C- (TQQLTLSPAAVPTR) terminuses, conserved peptide from ACD domain of Acdp1 (HNIVDILFVKDLAFVDPDDCTPLLTVTRF) were commercially synthesized (Sigma Genosys). These antigenic sites were predicted by software from Sigma Genosys and polyclonal antibodies for each peptide were produced by immunizing rabbits. To test the specificity of the antibodies, we conducted Western-blot analysis of mouse brain tissue extracts. As shown in Fig. 6A, the antibody produced by C-terminal peptide specifically detected Acdp1 (lane 3). The antibody generated by N-terminal peptide recognized Acdp4 in addition to Acdp1, although the reactivity to latter was significantly higher (Fig. 6A, lane 2). As expected, the antibody produced by the conserved sequence peptide detected all Acdp proteins (Fig. 6A, lane 1). To further determine the specificity of the antibody against the Acdp1 C-terminus, we analyzed extracts of HEK293, 3T3 and PC12 cells. The results are shown in Fig. 6B. Apparently, this antibody detected a specific band of Acdp1 in all cell lysates. Of note, shown in Fig. 6B are signals of 10 μg extracts of HEK293 cell lysates, 100 μg extracts of 3T3 and PC12 cell lysates. Thus, the expression levels of Acdp1 in these cell types vary a lot, with the highest expression in HEK293 cells. Nevertheless, these immunoblot results support our analysis of brain tissue extracts that the antibody against Acdp1 C-terminus specifically recognizes Acdp-1.

The specificity of the Acdp1 C-terminus antibody suggests the possibility of using it to localize Acdp-1 within cells. Since Northern blot revealed almost exclusive expression of Acdp1 in the brain, we examined its subcellular localization in hippocampus neurons isolated from mouse embryos. The neurons were cultured on glass coverslips coated with a confluent monolayer of mouse cortical astrocytes in dishes. Immunostaining was using the Acdp1 C-terminus specific antibody. Confocal imaging revealed that Acdp1 is predominantly localized on the plasma membrane. A series of sections of a cell at the thickness of 0.5 micrometer clearly showed membrane location of Acdp1-immunoreactivity (Fig. 7), which is consistent with the observation of transmembrane domains within the Acdp proteins.

Figure 6

Fig. 6A: Immunoblot analysis of Acdp proteins in brain tissue extracts. Immunoblotting were carried out using a Western blotting detection system (ECL) (PIERCE). Lane 1, probed with antibody generated by conserved peptide. From top to bottom, each band corresponding to Acdp1 (115 kD), Acdp2 (100 kD), Acdp4 (90 kD) and Acdp3 (80 kD). Lane 2 and 3, probed with the Acdp1 antibodies generated by N-terminal and C-terminal peptides, respectively. Fig. 6B: Immunoblot analysis of Acdp1 in HEK293, 3T3 and PC12 cells. The blots were probed with the antibody against the C-terminus of Acdp-1. Lane 1, 10 μg of HEK293 cell lysates. Lane 2 and 3, 100 μg of 3T3 and PC12 cell lysates.

Figure 7

Subcellular localization of Acdp1 in hippocampus neurons. A series of confocal images from a cultured neuron stained with an anti-Acdp1 antibody. The step of each imaging section is 0.5 μm, from the surface of the neuron (0 μm) to the middle plan (4.5 μm).

Discussion

Although the exact functions of the ACDP gene family are not yet elucidated, several lines of evidence suggest that ACDP genes may play an important role in biological processes. First, these genes are evolutionarily conserved in many phylogenetically divergent species; Second, multiple genes are present in a species; Third, these genes are ubiquitously expressed throughout development and adult tissues (unpublished data). The cloning and characterization of the mouse Acdp gene family are a very important step towards the elucidation of the functions of this multigene family.

Sequence homology analyses revealed that Acdp proteins shared very strong AA homologies to the bacteria CorC protein and yeast Amip3 protein. CorA, B, C and D belong to a protein family involved in both influx and efflux of magnesium and cobalt. It has been shown that CorA mutants confer resistance to cobalt toxicity [9]. Amip3 appears to be a homologous to CorC protein which is involved in efflux of magnesium and cobalt in bacteria. Amip3 mutants confer resistant to copper toxicity. Acdp proteins also possess the domains that are found in bacteria CorC and yeast Amip3 proteins, such as the CBS domains, DUF21 domain and transmembrane domains. In addition, a cNMP-binding domain was found in all Acdp proteins, which is usually present in ion channels and cNMP-dependent kinases [10-13]. Using antibody produced by Acdp1 C-terminal peptide, we have shown that Acdp1 is predominantly localized on the plasma membrane in hippocampus neurons. In our previous study, we found human ACDP proteins are predominantly localized in the nucleus in HeLa cells [1]. The discrepancy for Acdp localization in neuronal cells could be caused by non-specificity for previous antibody which was produced by the recombinant ACD domain, or different cells used. In current study, the Acdp1 C-terminus antibody only recognizes Acdp1 in brain tissue extracts as well as in HEK293, 3T3 and PC12 cell lysates, suggesting the specificity of the antibody. Our observations suggested that Acdp might be involved in ion transport in mammalian cells. However, more detailed functional studies are needed to demonstrate the real functions of these proteins.

Conclusions

Our previous work has described human ACDP genes [1]. The new information of the current work includes: 1). It is the first time to report the existence of multiple Acdp genes in other mammals in addition to human, while Acdp appears to be a single copy gene in lower organisms such as in C. elegans, yeasts and bacteria. We have also suggested the evolutionary relationships of Acdp genes in different species (phylogenetic tree); 2). Molecular cloning and characterization of murine Acdp gene family are essential for study of this novel gene family in animal model, e.g. for generation of knockout or transgenic models; 3). We have demonstrated both DNA and amino acid conservations between mouse and human for each Acdp gene and the whole Acdp gene family, which provide important information for the possibility of functional redundancy or overlap between Acdp members; 4). We have generated antibodies specific for Acdp1 and all Acdp proteins. The Acdp1 C-terminus antibody appears to specifically recognize Acdp1. Using this antibody, we have demonstrated that Acdp1 is predominantly localized on the plasma membrane in hippocampus neurons. These results represent an important step towards the characterization of functions for the Acdp gene family.

Methods

cDNA cloning

cDNA cloning of the Acdp gene family was performed based on human homologue sequences as previously reported [2]. Briefly, the human ACDP cDNAs and predicted AA sequences were used to search the mouse EST database for EST markers corresponding to each Acdp member. A forward primer within the human ACDP 5' cDNA coding region (after start codon) and a mouse reverse primer from the mouse EST marker were used to amplify the homologue sequence from mouse cDNA at very low annealing temperature (45–50°C). A nested PCR using an inside reverse primer from the mouse EST sequence and the same human forward primer was then carried out to amplify the specific mouse gene from the first round PCR products at high annealing temperature (62°C). The expected PCR products were directly excised from agarose gel and sequenced by an ABI377 automatic sequencer. The sequence was further confirmed using a forward primer from newly identified sequence and a reverse primer from known sequence. Once most of the coding sequences were identified, partial sequence of exon 1 and the 5' UTR sequences were obtained by BAC DNA sequencing.

Northern blot analyses

Multiple Choice Northern Blot filters containing 12 different mouse tissues were purchased from Origene. The filters were probed for each Acdp gene with a PCR fragment (around 350 bp) from last exon and the 3' untranslated region labeled with α-32P dCTP using the random primer extension system (Life Technologies). Hybridizations were carried out overnight. The filters were washed twice with washing buffer I (2×SSC, 0.1% SDS) at 42°C for 15-min, and then washed twice with washing buffer II (0.25×SSC, 0.1% SDS) at 65°C for 15-min. Washed filters were exposed to X-ray films for overnight or longer [3,4].

Antibody production and Western blot analyses

Peptides linked to KLH (keyhole limpet hemacyanin) from Acdp1 N- and C-terminals and the conserved domain (ACD) were used for generation of antibodies specifically for Acdp1 and all Acdp members as reported, respectively [5]. Western blots were carried out Using ECL (PIERCE) as described previously [1]. The membranes were washed extensively after incubation with primary and secondary antibodies and were then developed with X-ray films with optimal exposure time.

Chromosome localization

The T31 mouse radiation hybrid panel from Research Genetics was used to map the chromosome location of each Acdp member. Primers from 3' UTR of each Acdp member were used to amplify the 100 radiation hybrid clones representing the mouse genome. The data were submitted to the Jackson Laboratory Mouse Radiation Hybrid Database for analysis.

Sequence analyses

Sequence assembly was performed with program Sequencher (Gene Codes Corp). Protein and DNA homology searches were carried out with tblastn, tblastx, blastp and blastn programs . Multiple sequence alignments were performed with GeneDoc and pairwise sequence alignment . Multiple programs including BCM Search Launcher , ProfileScan , sequence motif search , ExPASy  and 3Dpssm  were used for searching sequence features of known protein. Phylogenetic tree was constructed by Clustalw program (version 1.81) using UPGMA (Unweighted Pair Group Method using Arithmetic averages) algorithm [14].

Neuronal cell preparation and immunostanining

Hippocampal neuron cultures were prepared as previously reported [6]. In brief, the hippocampuses were dissected out from mouse embryos at 16 days in utero. The tissues were then incubated for 20 min at 37°C in MEM (minimum essential medium) modified for suspension culture (Life Technologies) plus 0.25% trypsin (Life Technologies). The dissociated hippocampal neurons were plated on glass coverslips coated with a confluent monolayer of mouse cortical astrocytes obtained as described below. The neurons were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2. Cortical astrocytes dissociated from newborn mouse cortices were grown in culture flasks at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 until confluent. The cells were exposed to 10-5 M cytosine arabinoside (Sigma) and cultured for additional 12–24 hrs at 37°C. After remove of the media with cellular debris, the cells were used for coating coverslips.

For immunostaining, neuronal cells on the coverslips were first fixed in PBS containing 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 12 hrs at 4°C and then incubated in a solution containing 4% PFA and 0.4% Triton X-100 at 4°C for 1 hr. After washing with PBS three times, the cells were incubated with a blocking solution containing 1:30 normal goat serum, and subsequently incubated with a rabbit polyclonal anti-ACDP antibody (1:3000) overnight at 4°C. After extensive washing with 1% goat serum PBS solution, the cells were incubated with an Alex 488 conjugated secondary antibody (1:100 in 1% goat serum PBS solution, Molecular Probes) for 3 hrs at room temperature. Following final washes with 1% goat serum PBS solution, the neuronal cells on the coverslips were cover-slipped with a glycerol-based anti-photobleach medium. The cells were viewed under a confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss). Images were captured with a CCD camera and acquired by the Scion Image software (Scion Corporation, Frederick, MD).

Gene bank accession number

The cDNA sequences for the Acdp gene family have already been deposited in gene bank with accession numbers AF202994 (Acdp1), AF216961 (Acdp2), AF216964 (Acdp3) and AF216963 (Acdp4).

Authors' contributions

This study was designed by CYW and JXS. The study was performed as follows: CYW, PY, JDS and HA contributed to the molecular cloning part of the manuscript. CYW and SP were responsible for the Acdp antibody production. JGG and JLG did immunostaining for Acdp1 localization in neuronal cells. CYW, DG and ZD carried out the Western analyses.

Acknowledgements

This work was partly supported by a CIGP grant to C.Y.W.Dorsoventral Patterning of the Mouse Coat by Tbx15

Abstract

Many members of the animal kingdom display coat or skin color differences along their dorsoventral axis. To determine the mechanisms that control regional differences in pigmentation, we have studied how a classical mouse mutation, droopy ear (deH), affects dorsoventral skin characteristics, especially those under control of the Agouti gene. Mice carrying the Agouti allele black-and-tan (at) normally have a sharp boundary between dorsal black hair and yellow ventral hair; the deH mutation raises the pigmentation boundary, producing an apparent dorsal-to-ventral transformation. We identify a 216 kb deletion in deH that removes all but the first exon of the Tbx15 gene, whose embryonic expression in developing mesenchyme correlates with pigmentary and skeletal malformations observed in deH/deH animals. Construction of a targeted allele of Tbx15 confirmed that the deH phenotype was caused by Tbx15 loss of function. Early embryonic expression of Tbx15 in dorsal mesenchyme is complementary to Agouti expression in ventral mesenchyme; in the absence of Tbx15, expression of Agouti in both embryos and postnatal animals is displaced dorsally. Transplantation experiments demonstrate that positional identity of the skin with regard to dorsoventral pigmentation differences is acquired by E12.5, which is shortly after early embryonic expression of Tbx15. Fate-mapping studies show that the dorsoventral pigmentation boundary is not in register with a previously identified dermal cell lineage boundary, but rather with the limb dorsoventral boundary. Embryonic expression of Tbx15 in dorsolateral mesenchyme provides an instructional cue required to establish the future positional identity of dorsal dermis. These findings represent a novel role for T-box gene action in embryonic development, identify a previously unappreciated aspect of dorsoventral patterning that is widely represented in furred mammals, and provide insight into the mechanisms that underlie region-specific differences in body morphology.

Introduction

A fundamental question in developmental biology is how adjacent regions of the vertebrate body acquire differences in their appearance or morphology. Mechanisms that establish the general body plan make use of a relatively small number of signaling pathways shared among all animals (reviewed in Pires-daSilva and Sommer 2003), but the extent to which these pathways control finer differences between body regions is not clear. Among vertebrates, differences in the shape or number of skeletal elements, altered morphology of epidermal appendages, and variation in pigment distribution combine to produce the majority of what distinguishes one animal from another. Among these, pigment patterns are an excellent system to investigate how morphological differences arise, both for different regions of the body within a species and for different animals from closely related species. In natural environments, color variation is a nearly universal mechanism for recognition, camouflage, or both; consequently, a large number of pigment patterns have been characterized from an evolutionary and ecological perspective (Boughman 2001; Jiggins et al. 2001). In the laboratory, color variation has been the subject of vertebrate genetics for more than a century (Searle 1968; Silvers 1979), and many pigmentary components have been identified whose actions are understood in a cellular or organ-based context (reviewed in Bennett and Lamoreux 2003).

Several mechanisms may contribute to regional differences in vertebrate pigmentation. In the embryo, alterations in the determination or migration of melanoblasts from the neural crest affect the number or distribution of pigment cells in the skin (reviewed in Reedy et al. 1998). Within hair follicles, paracrine signals control the type of pigment made in specific regions of the body or at specific times during the hair cycle (reviewed in Furumura et al. 1996; Barsh et al. 2000). Finally, movement of pigment granules within melanocytes or from melanocytes to keratinocytes makes use of cellular machinery that is shared by a variety of cell types, but that can vary in different regions of the body (reviewed in Marks and Seabra 2001). However, for all of these mechanisms—white spotting, pigment-type switching, and melanosome biogenesis—more is known about the identity of the molecular components than their spatial and temporal control.

One of the most obvious aspects of regional color variation in vertebrates is a dark dorsal surface juxtaposed to a light ventral surface, apparent in the color of skin, scales, feathers, or hair, in which the boundary between dorsal and ventral compartments is often sharp and lies in register with the limbs. In rodents and probably other mammals, this dorsoventral difference in hair color is brought about by differences in pigment type as determined by allelic variation of the Agouti gene (Bultman et al. 1992; Miller et al. 1993). Secreted by dermal papilla cells within each hair follicle (Millar et al. 1995), Agouti protein causes melanocytes in that follicle to switch from the production of brown/black eumelanin to red/yellow pheomelanin. Agouti protein has a short radius of action (Silvers and Russel 1955) and can be switched on and off during a single hair cycle (Bultman et al. 1992, 1994; Miller et al. 1993; Vrieling et al. 1994); thus, its regulated expression is thought to be responsible for the cream-colored or yellow ventral surface of mice carrying the black-and-tan (at) allele and for the yellow markings around the feet, ears, or head, i.e., tan points or head spots, of certain dog breeds.

In laboratory mice, previous studies from our group and others identified two predominant Agouti mRNA isoforms that differ by virtue of their transcriptional initiation site and 5′ untranslated exons. A “hair cycle-specific” transcript is expressed in both dorsal and ventral skin for 2–3 days during early hair growth, while a “ventral-specific” transcript is expressed throughout the entire period of active hair growth, but only in ventral skin (Bultman et al. 1994; Vrieling et al. 1994). Animals carrying the at allele express only the ventral-specific Agouti transcript (Bultman et al. 1994; Vrieling et al. 1994) and have black dorsal hairs and cream-colored to yellow ventral hairs, with a sharp boundary at the level of the limb–body wall articulations and in the middle of the whisker pad. Ventral-specific Agouti isoforms are also expressed in developing skin from embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) and beyond and may play a role in pigment cell differentiation (Millar et al. 1995). Thus, regulatory elements for ventral-specific Agouti isoforms are responsive to dorsoventral positional cues established in the embryo and whose effects persist after birth.

The boundary between dorsal and ventral color compartments in at/at mice bears superficial resemblance to dorsoventral boundaries apparent for many other mammals, but morphogenetic differences between dorsal and ventral skin seem likely to include more elements than the type of pigment made by hair follicle melanocytes. In particular, dermis of the flank has at least two distinct origins: dermatomal derivatives of somites and loose mesenchyme derived from the lateral plate mesoderm (Mauger 1972; Christ et al. 1983; Olivera-Martinez et al. 2000; Nowicki et al. 2003); these lineages are established early in development and could, in principle, set up compartments whose identity contributes to dorsoventral differences in adult skin.

To better understand the mechanisms that give rise to differences between dorsal and ventral skin and to the boundary between them, we have determined how several morphologic characteristics vary along the dorsoventral axis of the mouse and how these characteristics correspond to ventral-specific Agouti expression and the lineage boundary that distinguishes somite from lateral plate derivatives. Our results indicate that the apparent uniformity of the dorsoventral boundary represents the sum of independent mechanisms that affect melanocyte density and/or differentiation, pigment-type synthesis, and hair length; surprisingly, none of these coincide with the somite–lateral plate lineage boundary. We also make use of a classical mouse mutation, droopy ear (Curry 1959), that produces a dorsal-to-ventral transformation of flank coat color by allowing expansion of the ventral-specific Agouti transcript. By positional cloning and gene targeting, we identify an allele of droopy ear, deH, as a loss of function for Tbx15, which encodes a T-box transcription factor expressed in a dynamic and spatially restricted manner in the developing skin and musculoskeletal system. Embryonic expression and transplantation studies suggest that Tbx15 is required to establish certain characteristics of dorsal patterning in mesenchymal cells of the developing flank. These results identify a previously unappreciated aspect of dorsoventral patterning that is widely represented in furred mammals and provide insight into the mechanisms that underlie region-specific differences in body morphology.

Results

Morphological Components of Dorsoventral Skin Differences

Besides the obvious change in hair color that frequently distinguishes dorsal from ventral skin, casual observation suggests there are additional differences in hair length, distribution of hair type, and skin thickness. Furthermore, dorsoventral differences in pigmentation can represent differences in the number and/or differentiated state of pigment cells, as well as the type of pigment synthesized in response to expression of Agouti. In particular, ventral hair of at/at animals can vary from cream-colored to reddish-yellow depending on age, strain background, and position along the dorsoventral axis. To evaluate the relationship among these components, we compared their features among mice of different Agouti genotypes.

Semiquantitative measurements of hair length plotted as a function of dorsoventral position reveal that the apparent sharp boundary between dorsal and ventral pigment compartments in at/at mice coincides with a more gradual change in both hair color and hair length (Figure 1A–1D). Within the region of transition from dorsum to ventrum (Figure 1B), flank hairs from at/at mice become progressively shorter and exhibit increasing amounts of pheomelanin deposition progressing from the tip to the base of the hair. However, the region of transition for hair length is considerably broader than that for pigmentation and independent of Agouti genotype. Although hair-cycle timing varies along the rostrocaudal axis, measurements of absolute hair length for mice matched for age and rostrocaudal level are remarkably similar (Figure 1D). Furthermore, measurements of relative hair length for animals of different age, size, and Agouti genotype also are very similar when normalized to body circumference (Figure 1C). Taken together, these observations indicate that variation of hair length along the dorsoventral axis is stereotyped and maintained through multiple hair cycles, with a transition in hair length that is gradual and encompasses the pigment-type transition in at/at mice.

Dorsal and ventral skin develop at different rates. Transverse sections of skin at postnatal day 4.5 (P4.5) exhibit dorsal hair follicles that are noticeably more developed than ventral hair follicles, along with a gradual dorsoventral decrease in dermal thickness (Figure 1F). However, differences in skin thickness disappear by 3–4 wk of age (Forsthoefel et al. 1966), and, overall, the proportion of different hair types is also similar in dorsa and ventra of adult mice. In age-matched inbred mice, we observed a small decrease in the ratio of undercoat hairs (zigzags) to overcoat hairs (auchenes, awls, and guard hairs) in dorsum compared to ventrum (Figure 1E), but there was no consistent difference in hair-type distribution for outbred mice (data not shown).

Differences between dorsal and ventral pigmentation of at/at mice are usually attributed to pigment-type differences caused by ventral-specific expression of Agouti, but animals homozygous for a null allele of Agouti, extreme nonagouti (ae), have ventral hairs that contain less melanin than dorsal hairs, giving a slightly paler appearance to the ventral coat (Figure 1G). Using DOPA staining as an indicator of tyrosinase activity, we observed a gradual dorsoventral transition in isolated dermis preparations from P4.5 ae/ae mice (Figure 1G). By contrast, skin from at/at mice reveal an abrupt dorsoventral transition of DOPA staining, which probably reflects the additive effects of reduced melanin content (as in ae/ae mice) and downregulation of tyrosinase activity induced by Agouti. Melanin content of individual hairs is likely to be influenced both by the number of pigment cells and their follicular environment. Regardless, dorsoventral differences in hair pigment content of ae/ae mice persist throughout multiple hair cycles into adulthood, similar to hair length (but unlike skin thickness). Thus, at least three characteristics distinguish dorsal from ventral skin: differences in pigment-type synthesis (depending on Agouti genotype), differences in hair length, and differences in melanin content.

Ventralization of Skin Morphology by the droopy ear Mutation

Named after its effects on craniofacial morphology, droopy ear is a recessive mutation on mouse Chromosome 3; the original allele described more than 40 years ago by Curry (1959) is extinct, but a spontaneous remutation that occurred in Harwell, deH, is available through The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine, United States). External craniofacial malformations are the most obvious characteristic of deH/deH animals, including widely spaced eyes, small palpebral fissures, a broad nasal area, and a shortened skull held in an elevated position, which presumably causes or contributes to the abnormal position of the ears.

We became interested in droopy ear because the original allele was described to affect pigment pattern in a way that suggests a possible dorsal to ventral transformation: “On a genetic background (at and AW) which causes the belly hair to be lighter than the back hair, the belly hair comes up farther round the sides of the body and face” (Curry 1959).

An abnormal dorsoventral pigment pattern is readily apparent in at/at; deH/deH mice, but comparison to nonmutant animals is more accurately described in terms of ventral, lateral, and dorsal regions (Figures 1G and 2A). The ventral region has short hairs with a gray base and cream-colored tip whose boundary coincides with the limb–body wall junction; both the appearance of this region and position of the boundary are approximately similar in at/at compared to at/at; deH/deH mice. The lateral region contains yellow hairs of progressively increasing length; in at/at mice, the lateral region appears as a thin yellow stripe along the flank, but in at/at; deH/deH mice, the lateral region is considerably expanded with a diffuse boundary along the dorsal flank, and a dorsal eumelanic region whose size is correspondingly reduced (Figure 2A and 2B). Total body size is smaller in mutant compared to nonmutant animals, but the proportion of body circumference occupied by the lateral region in mutant animals is increased about 2-fold, from 11.9% to 22.2% (Figure 2C). The proportion of the ventral cream-colored region is also expanded a small amount, 47.9% in mutant compared to 37.8% in nonmutant animals, but expansion of the lateral region, which occurs at all levels of the body, including the limbs and the cranium (but not the whisker pad), is the major feature responsible for the ventralized appearance caused by deH.

To investigate whether deH affects other dorsoventral skin characteristics besides pigment-type switching, we examined its effects on hair length and pigmentation in an ae/ae background. Overall, deH causes a small but consistent reduction in hair length in both dorsum and ventrum; when mutant and nonmutant animals are normalized for body circumference, reduced hair length is most apparent in the lateral region (Figure 2E). Adult ae/ae; deH/deH animals exhibit body-size reduction and skeletal abnormalities, but display no coat-color phenotype (data not shown). However, ae/ae and ae/ae; deH/deH neonates are clearly distinguishable in the first few days after birth, when a dorsoventral gradient of melanogenic activity is apparent under the skin (Figure 2D). At this stage, melanoblast migration from the neural crest is mostly complete, but there is a dorsoventral gradient in melanocyte differentiation and pigment synthesis. The skin of ae/ae neonates appears uniformly dark over the entire dorsum, but in ae/ae; deH/deH neonates, the area of dark skin is more restricted, particularly above the limbs, and resembles the pattern of dorsal eumelanin in at/at; deH/deH adult animals.

Taken together, these observations suggest that deH interferes with the establishment of dorsoventral patterning during skin development by causing dorsal expansion of a lateral region that is normally 3–5 mm in width. This same region may serve as a boundary between dorsal and ventral skin by inhibiting melanocyte differentiation, by promoting pheomelanin synthesis, and by supporting a progressive increase in hair growth from ventrum to dorsum. As described below, the gene defective in deH, Tbx15, is normally expressed in the dorsal region and therefore is likely to play a role in establishing the size and dorsal extent of the lateral region.

Positional Cloning of deH

As a visible marker, early linkage studies with the original droopy ear allele or the deH allele identified a map position in the middle of Chromosome 3, distal to matted and proximal to Varitint-waddler (Carter and Falconer 1951; Curry 1959; Lane and Eicher 1979; Holmes et al. 1981). We used an F2 intercross with CAST/Ei mice to localize deH to a 0.1 cM interval between D3Mit213 and 16.MMHAP32FLF1, which was refined by development of a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) contig and additional markers to a 1.4 Mb region that contained eight genes, including Tbx15 (Figure 3A). We considered Tbx15 as an excellent candidate for the skeletal abnormalities caused by deH, based on studies by Agulnik et al. (1998), who described its embryonic expression in the craniofacial region and developing limbs.

Using sequence information from Agulnik et al. (1998) and the partially completed mouse genome sequence, we found that portions of several Tbx15 exons could not be amplified from deH/deH genomic DNA. The same gene was initially referred to as Tbx8 (Wattler et al. 1998) and then later renamed Tbx14, but is currently referred to in several vertebrate genomes as Tbx15 (Agulnik et al. 1998; Begemann et al. 2002). By comparing the sequence of a 1.3 kb junction fragment amplified from deH/deH genomic DNA to publicly available mouse genome sequence, we identified a 216 kb deletion that extends from Tbx15 intron 1 to 148 kb downstream of the polyadenylation sequence in a region annotated as a mannose-6-phosphate receptor pseudogene, M6pr-ps (Figure 3B and 3C). (Ludwig et al. 1992). By Northern blot analysis, we identified a fusion transcript produced from the deH chromosome (data not shown). However, the deletion removes 534 of the 602 amino acids encoded by Tbx15 (including the T-box DNA-binding domain), deH/+ animals are grossly normal, and the phenotype of deH/deH animals is identical to that described for the original allele. In addition, other than M6pr-ps, no other genes or transcripts have been annotated to the 216 kb deletion.

While the positional cloning work was underway, one of us (A. Russ) generated an independent mutation of Tbx15 by gene targeting in embryonic stem cells. The targeted allele, Tbx15LacZ, carries an IRES-LacZ-neo cDNA cassette that disrupts the open reading frame at codon 154 early in the T-box domain (Figure 3D). Animals heterozygous for the targeted allele are completely normal with regard to size, skeletal morphology, and hair-color distribution, but Tbx15LacZ/Tbx15LacZ homozygotes were noted to exhibit reduced body size and an abnormal craniofacial appearance identical to that caused by deH. We generated Tbx15LacZ/deH compound heterozygotes; on an Aw/at background, these animals exhibited the same abnormal restriction of dorsal pigmentation at P3.5 and expanded yellow flank area as described above for deH/deH animals (see Figure 2). These observations demonstrate that the pigmentary and craniofacial characteristics of deH are caused by loss of function for Tbx15.

Expression of Tbx15 and Agouti

Previous studies by Agulnik et al. (1998) using whole-mount in situ hybridization described expression of Tbx15 as first detectable at E9.5 in the limb buds, progressing to the branchial arches, flanks, and craniofacial regions through E12.5. To investigate this pattern in more detail, we hybridized a Tbx15 mRNA probe to a series of transverse sections at E12.5 and observed expression in multiple mesenchymal tissues of the head, trunk, and developing limbs (Figure 4A), much of which is consistent with the skull, cervical vertebrae, and limb malformations reported for mice carrying the original droopy ear allele.

We were particularly interested in determining the exact nature of the embryonic flank expression relative to the ventralized phenotype of adult deH/deH mice. Transverse abdominal sections from different times during development reveal a dorsolateral band of expression in the superficial mesenchyme at E11.5 that broadens both dorsally and ventrally over the next several days (Figure 4B). By E13.5, the developing dermis has become separated from the loose mesenchyme by a subcutaneous muscle layer; Tbx15 is expressed in all of these layers as well as the underlying abdominal muscles. In P3.5 skin, Tbx15 is expressed in both dorsal and ventral skin, most strongly in the condensed upper dermis and developing dermal sheaths of hair follicles; faint expression can also be detected in rare dermal papillae cells (Figure 4B).

Although the effects of Agouti on pigment-type switching occur during postnatal hair growth, the ventral-specific isoform of Agouti is expressed in developing skin beginning at E11.5. We compared adjacent sections hybridized with probes for Tbx15 and Agouti and observed complementary patterns at E12.5, with expression of Agouti in ventral skin and expression of Tbx15 in dorsal skin (Figure 5A and 5B). The junction between expression domains is indistinct, and by E14.5, Tbx15 expression extends ventrally and overlaps extensively with Agouti expression (Figure 5C and 5D).

We also examined the effect of deH on expression of Agouti and found no difference between mutant and nonmutant at E12.5 or E13.5 (data not shown). However, at E14.5, the normal ventral-to-dorsal gradient of Agouti expression appeared to extend more dorsally in deH/deH embryos (Figure 6A). In P4.5 skin, expression of Agouti is also extended dorsally in deH/deH animals and is most apparent in the midflank region within the upper dermis and dermal papillae cells (Figure 6B). Thus, while the pigmentation phenotype of deH/deH mice can be explained, not surprisingly, by dorsal extension of Agouti expression after birth, patterned expression of Tbx15 and Agouti are apparent some 10 days earlier, between E12.5 and E13.5, and the effects of Tbx15 deficiency on expression of Agouti can be detected by E14.5.

Relationship of Embryonic Tbx15 Expression to Dorsal and Ventral Pigmentation Domains

The observations described above are consistent with a model in which transient expression of Tbx15 in the embryonic dorsal flank is required to establish positional identity of the future dermis, at least with respect to pigment-type synthesis caused by the ventral-specific Agouti isoform. To further investigate this hypothesis, we carried out transplantation experiments in which pieces of embryonic skin were isolated from different dorsoventral positions. We evaluated the embryonic skin fragments for their potential to give rise to different hair colors and for their expression of Tbx15 and Agouti.

Previous studies by Silvers and colleagues (Poole and Silvers 1976) showed that dorsal and ventral skin isolated from at/at embryos gives rise to black and yellow hair, respectively, when transplanted into testis and allowed to develop for several weeks. Furthermore, dermal–epidermal recombination experiments carried out at E14.5 demonstrated that positional identity is carried by the embryonic dermis. In a variation on this experiment, we divided embryonic skin from at/a embryos into dorsal, flank, and ventral pieces and analyzed the different pieces for their ability to give rise to black or yellow hair after testis transplantation, and, in parallel, for gene expression using in situ hybridization. For the purposes of a reproducible morphologic boundary, we divided flank from ventral skin based on a change in skin thickness and divided dorsal from flank skin at the level of an ectodermal notch that lies at the same level as the ventral extent of the myotome (Figure 7) (Huang and Christ 2000; Olivera-Martinez et al. 2000; Sudo et al. 2001; Burke and Nowicki 2003; Nowicki et al. 2003).

We found that E12.5 is the earliest time at which embryonic ventral skin is able to produce hair when transplanted to the testis. Of the grafts that produced hair, ventral skin gave rise to yellow hair (n = 3), and dorsal skin gave rise to black hair (n = 4). Transplantation of flank skin gave rise to a patch of yellow hair juxtaposed against a patch of black hair in 85% of the successful grafts (n = 13); the remaining two flank grafts produced solely black or yellow hair. In no case did we observe intermingling of black and yellow hairs. As predicted from the experiments using tissue sections (see Figures 5 and 6), dorsal pieces expressed Tbx15 but not Agouti, while flank pieces expressed both genes (see Figure 7). Thus, dorsoventral identity for adult pigmentation is established by the time when patterned expression becomes apparent for Tbx15 and Agouti (E11.5–E12.5); furthermore, positional identity is maintained throughout later stages of skin development, even though expression of Tbx15 broadens to include ventral as well as dorsal skin.

Relationship of the Dorsoventral Pigment Boundary to Lineage Compartments and the Lateral Somitic Frontier

The ectodermal notch that we used to mark the boundary between embryonic dorsum and embryonic flank is a characteristic feature in vertebrate embryos. In cell lineage studies carried out in the chick system, the notch serves as a landmark for the boundary between dermis derived from somitic mesoderm and dermis derived from lateral plate mesoderm and has been termed the “lateral somitic frontier” (Olivera-Martinez et al. 2000; Sudo et al. 2001; Burke and Nowicki 2003; Nowicki et al. 2003). Although fate-mapping studies have not been carried out in mammalian embryos, somite- and lateral plate-derived mesoderm could give rise to precursors for dermis dorsal and ventral to the limb–body wall junction, respectively. However, this notion conflicts with our observation that the future pigmentation boundary lies ventral to the ectodermal notch (see Figure 7).

To examine directly the relationship between the pigmentation boundary and dermis derived from lateral plate mesoderm, we made use of a Cre transgene driven by the Hoxb6 promoter that was developed by Kuehn and colleagues (Lowe et al. 2000). As described by Lowe et al. (2000), midgestation embryos carrying both the Hoxb6-Cre transgene and the R26R lacZ reporter gene (Soriano 1999) exhibit X-Gal staining in lateral plate mesoderm but not somite-derived mesoderm of the trunk. In whole-mount skin preparations from P1.5 or P4.5 neonatal animals, we observed a ventral band of dark X-Gal staining corresponding to lateral plate-derived dermis, which represents 63% of the total circumference (Figure 8A). However, in parallel preparations from at/at mice, the ventral pheomelanin domain represents 47% of the total skin circumference; therefore, the proportions of total skin circumference occupied by dorsal eumelanin and somite-derived dermis are 53% and 37%, respectively (Figure 8B). These results indicate that the pigmentation boundary is clearly distinct from, and more ventral to, the boundary between lateral plate- and somite-derived dermis.

Because the pigmentation boundary lies in register with the limb–body wall junction (see Figure 2), we wondered whether mechanisms used for dorsoventral limb patterning might be related to those used to establish the pigmentation boundary. In the developing limb, Engrailed1 (En1), Wnt7a, and Lmx1b are part of a network whose restricted domains of expression help to establish dorsoventral identity (reviewed in Niswander 2003). En1 is transiently expressed in the developing flank; at E11.5, transverse abdominal sections reveal domains in the neural tube, somite-derived mesenchyme, and the ventral body wall (Figure 8C). An adjacent section hybridized with Tbx15 reveals a complementary pattern in the flank, which provides additional evidence for developmental mechanisms that establish a pigmentation boundary entirely within lateral plate mesoderm and independent of lineage restrictions imposed by the lateral somitic frontier.

Discussion

Several mutations and genes have been identified that affect the pattern of hair follicle development, but Tbx15 is the only gene of which we are aware that affects the pattern of hair pigmentation in different body regions. Ventral areas that normally produce yellow hair in the trunk, limbs, and craniofacial regions are expanded in deH/deH mice and, in the trunk at least, represent inappropriate dorsal expression of an Agouti mRNA isoform that is normally restricted to ventral skin. The deH allele is caused by a large deletion that removes most of the Tbx15 coding sequence, but the pleiotropic phenotype is caused by a simple loss of function for Tbx15 rather than a dominant-negative or contiguous gene effect. In particular, there is no heterozygous phenotype, no other genes lie within or close to the deletion breakpoints, and the expression pattern of Tbx15 is consistent with the spectrum of phenotypic abnormalities in both the original de allele and the deH allele. Finally, a Tbx15 targeted allele has the same phenotype as deH.

Our results suggest that patterned expression of Tbx15 provides an instructional cue required to establish the future identity of dorsal dermis with regard to pigmentary and hair length patterning. The ventral edge of Tbx15 expression in the developing flank does not correspond to a known lineage compartment, but, like limb development, occurs within lateral plate mesoderm. These findings represent a novel role for T-box gene action in embryonic development and provide evidence for a previously unappreciated complexity to acquisition of dorsoventral positional identity in mammalian skin.

Distinct Morphologic Regions Represent the Sum of Different Gradients

The visual boundary between dorsal and ventral skin in at/at mice is reminiscent of other systems in which adjacent compartments enforce a binary choice between alternative patterns of gene expression and cell fate (reviewed in Dahmann and Basler 1999). However, Agouti mRNA in both embryonic and postnatal skin is distributed along a gradient whose dorsal boundary is indistinct and overlaps with two additional gradients recognized by their effects on hair length and histochemical staining for melanocytes. The three gradients are close but not congruent, and it is their proximity that gives rise to the superficial distinction between dorsal and ventral skin of at/at mice. Indeed, slight differences between the regions of transition for pigment-type switching and pigment content give rise to a subtle yellow stripe along the flank (see Figures 1, 2, and 9A). Levels of Agouti mRNA remain high throughout the entire ventrum, but hair pigment content is reduced, giving rise to a cream-colored region in the ventrum that, depending on age and genetic backgrounds, may appear more or less distinct from the yellow flank stripe.

Loss of Tbx15 affects dorsoventral transitions of hair length, pigment content, and expression of the ventral-specific Agouti isoform; however, the former two effects are subtle and contribute little, if at all, to the abnormal pigmentation of adult deH/deH mice. Thus, despite the abnormal pattern of dark skin in neonatal deH/deH mice (e.g., Figure 2D), the most obvious feature in adults is dorsal displacement of the “boundary” between black and yellow hair (Figure 9A).

Genetics of Tbx15

Named for the presence of a DNA-binding domain first identified in the mouse Brachyury gene (haploinsufficiency causes a short tail), T box–containing genes have been identified as developmental regulators in a wide spectrum of tissues and multicellular organisms (reviewed in Papaioannou 2001). The Tbx15 subfamily, which also includes Tbx18 and Tbx22, is likely to have arisen during early chordate evolution since there is a single gene in amphioxus but no obvious homolog in the fly genome (Ruvinsky et al. 2000). Consistent with this relationship, the three genes are expressed in partially overlapping patterns that include anterior somites (Tbx18 and Tbx22), limb mesenchyme (Tbx15 and Tbx18), and craniofacial mesenchyme (all three genes, Tbx15 more broadly than Tbx18 or Tbx22) (Agulnik et al. 1998; Kraus et al. 2001; Braybrook et al. 2002; Bush et al. 2002; Herr et al. 2003). These observations suggest that an ancestral gene for Tbx15, Tbx18, and Tbx22 may have been important for craniofacial development in cephalochordates, with acquisition of additional expression patterns and developmental functions in the limb and the trunk during early vertebrate evolution. Expression of Tbx18 and Tbx22 has not been reported in embryonic flank mesenchyme, which suggests that Tbx15 is the only family member involved in establishing the dorsoventral identity of the trunk. However, it would not be surprising to find some degree of functional redundancy in animals mutated for two or three of the subfamily members in other body regions, particularly the limbs and the head. For example, mutations in Tbx22 cause the human syndrome X-linked cleft palate and ankyloglossia (Braybrook et al. 2001). Despite high levels of Tbx22 expression in periocular embryonic mesenchyme (Braybrook et al. 2002; Bush et al. 2002; Herr et al. 2003), the condition does not affect the eye, perhaps because residual activity is provided by Tbx15 in the same region.

In an initial description of the expression and map location of mouse Tbx15, Agulnik et al. (1998) suggested human Tbx15 that lies on Chromosome 1p11.1 as a candidate for acromegaloid facial appearance (AFA) syndrome, for which there is a weak positive LOD score to Chromosome 1p (Hughes et al. 1985). Originally described as a rare autosomal-dominant syndrome with progressive facial coarsening, overgrowth of the intraoral mucosa, and large, doughy hands, more recent case reports describe macrosomia, macrocephaly, or both and generalized hypertrichosis with progressive coarsening (Dallapiccola et al. 1992; Irvine et al. 1996; da Silva et al. 1998; Zelante et al. 2000). The deH phenotype exhibits little overlap with these features; instead, we suggest a more likely candidate for mutations of human TBX15 would be frontofacionasal syndrome, an unmapped autosomal recessive condition characterized by brachycephaly, blepharophimosis, and midface hypoplasia (Reardon et al. 1994).

Two of us (S. Kuijper and F. Meijlink) became interested in the deH mutation because of its effects on skeletal development (Curry 1959) and the possibility that the aristaless-related gene Alx3 might be allelic with droopy ear (ten Berge et al. 1998). In spite of similarities between skeletal phenotypes of deH and Alx3 or Alx4 mutants, subsequent experiments (unpublished data) excluded allelism of Alx3 and deH, and a full description of the Tbx15 skeletal phenotype will be published elsewhere.

Developmental Mechanism of Tbx15 Expression and Action in the Skin

Our attention to the role of Tbx15 in pigment patterning was motivated by the effects of Agouti in postnatal animals. However, Agouti is also expressed in the embryo, where it provides a convenient marker of ventral dermis identity. Because an expanded domain of embryonic Agouti expression in deH/deH animals is detectable by E14.5, the effects of Tbx15 on dorsoventral patterning must occur prior to this time. Among other T-box genes whose developmental actions are at least partially understood, two general themes have emerged, one focused on the ability to specify alternative fates for an undifferentiated group of precursor cells and another focused on the ability to support proliferative expansion of a cell population whose fate is already determined (reviewed in Tada and Smith 2001). Either mechanism may apply to the apparent dorsal-to-ventral transformation in deH/deH mice. For example, while the expanded domain of Agouti expression in postnatal deH/deH animals can be traced to events that occur between E11.5 and E13.5, the underlying cause may be that embryonic cells in dorsolateral mesenchyme acquire a ventral rather than dorsal identity or that those cells fail to proliferate normally, followed by compensatory expansion of ventral cells. Cell lineage studies should provide a definitive answer, but we favor the latter hypothesis, because measurements of dorsoventral regions according to hair color in deH/deH mice revealed a small increase of the cream-colored ventral region in addition to the approximate doubling of the yellow flank region (see Figure 2).

In embryonic mesenchyme, expression of Tbx15 and Agouti are complementary, and it is possible that Tbx15 acts directly to inhibit Agouti transcription in dorsolateral mesenchyme. However, the ability of Tbx15 to suppress expression of the ventral-specific Agouti isoform in postnatal mice is likely to be indirect, since postnatal expression of Tbx15 occurs broadly along the dorsoventral axis and overlaps extensively with that of Agouti. In either case, the targets of Tbx15 action in the skin include genes in addition to Agouti, since hair length and melanocyte distribution exhibit a demonstrable, albeit subtle, alteration in animals that carry a null Agouti allele. One potential target is Alx4, which, like Agouti, is expressed in ventral embryonic mesenchyme, and, when mutated, affects hair-follicle as well as limb and craniofacial development (Qu et al. 1997, 1998; Wu et al. 2000; Wuyts et al. 2000; Mavrogiannis et al. 2001). However, expression of ventral markers such as Alx4, as well as Alx3 and Msx2, appears to be unaffected at E11.5 in deH/deH embryos (data not shown).

Differences and Similarities to Dorsoventral Limb Patterning

Loss of Tbx15 also affects regional distribution of hair color in the limbs, with areas that would normally produce black hair giving rise to yellow hair instead. However, neither normal patterns of pigment-type synthesis in the limb nor their disruption in deH/deH mice correspond to obvious developmental compartments. Furthermore, losses of function for En1 or Wnt7a, which cause a partial transformation of the distal limb from dorsum to ventrum (Loomis et al. 1996) or ventrum to dorsum (Parr and McMahon 1995), respectively, have no effect on regional patterns of Agouti expression or distribution of hair-color regions (Y. Chen, unpublished data). (Ectopic pigmentation of the ventral footpads that develops in En1 mutant mice is unrelated to pigment-type synthesis and instead likely reflects a requirement for En1, independent of Wnt7a, to repress migration or proliferation (or both) of pigment cells in ventral epidermis [Cygan et al. 1997; Loomis et al. 1998].)

These considerations notwithstanding, control of dorsoventral trunk pattern by Tbx15 shares certain features with control of dorsoventral limb patterning by Lmx1b, a LIM domain transcription factor that acts downstream of Wnt7a and En1 (Riddle et al. 1995; Vogel et al. 1995; Cygan et al. 1997; Logan et al. 1997; Loomis et al. 1998; Chen and Johnson 2002). Both Tbx15 and Lmx1b act autonomously in mesenchymal cells to promote a dorsal identity, yet have expression domains that do not correspond to cell lineage compartments in the flank (Tbx15) or the limb (Lmx1b) (Altabef et al. 1997; Michaud et al. 1997). In the case of Lmx1b, its expression in the distal limb depends on Wnt7a produced in the overlying dorsal ectoderm (Riddle et al. 1995; Cygan et al. 1997; Loomis et al. 1998). Wnt7a, in turn, is restricted to dorsal ectoderm by En1 in the ventral ectoderm (Loomis et al. 1996; Cygan et al. 1997; Logan et al. 1997), whose expression marks a lineage boundary coincident with the dorsoventral midline of the apical ectodermal ridge (Altabef et al. 1997; Michaud et al. 1997; Kimmel et al. 2000). As described above, En1 or Wnt7a mutations have not been reported to affect patterns of hair-color distribution (C. Loomis, personal communication; Parr and McMahon 1995; Loomis et al. 1996). However, the essential theme that ectodermal lineage compartments control the fate of underlying mesenchyme in developing limbs may apply to the trunk as well as the limb. The mammary glands also develop at a stereotyped dorsoventral position and depend on epithelial–mesenchymal interactions. However, the number and apparent position of the mammary glands are normal in deH/deH animals, indicating the existence of additional mechanisms that control dorsoventral patterning in the trunk as well as in the limbs.

These ideas are summarized in the model shown in Figure 9B. We speculate that a diffusible signal from dorsal trunk ectoderm, at or prior to E11.5, promotes expression of Tbx15 in dorsal trunk mesenchyme, which then establishes dorsal positional identity of those cells as manifested by differences in Agouti expression, pigment-cell development, and hair growth. Because the ventral limit of Tbx15 expression corresponds to the dorsal limit of En1 expression and because the normal position of the pigmentation boundary lies approximately in register with the limb-bud outgrowths, we depict the position of a putative dorsoventral boundary in trunk ectoderm as coincident with the limb dorsoventral boundary. This model is consistent with studies in the chick, where distinct dorsal and ventral lineage compartments exist for ectoderm in both the limb (Altabef et al. 1997, 2000; Michaud et al. 1997; Kimmel et al. 2000) and interlimb regions (Altabef et al. 1997, 2000), but not for limb mesoderm (Altabef et al. 1997; Michaud et al. 1997). In fact, the same mechanism that determines dorsoventral position of the limbs and the apical ectodermal ridge may also act on expression of Tbx15 in the trunk, since ectopic limbs induced in the interlimb region by application of FGF beads develop along a single line that is coincident with normal limb buds (and the future pigmentation boundary) (Cohn et al. 1995; Crossley et al. 1996; Vogel et al. 1996; Altabef et al. 1997, 2000).

Our model predicts that ectopic expression of Tbx15 in ventral mesenchyme should give rise to a dorsalized pigmentation phenotype and could be tested with gain-of-function approaches. However, Tbx15 expression is very dynamic and is restricted to dorsal mesoderm only from E11.5 to E13.5. It is possible that Tbx15 influences skin patterning in a very narrow window of development; alternatively, establishment of dorsal identity by Tbx15 may require another as-yet-unidentified factor that is only present in the mesenchyme underlying dorsal ectoderm.

Pigmentation Patterns and Tbx15 in Other Mammals

The lateral somitic frontier, defined as the lineage boundary between somite-derived versus lateral plate-derived mesoderm, is established during somitogenesis early in development (Mauger 1972; Christ et al. 1983; Olivera-Martinez et al. 2000; Nowicki et al. 2003), but remains distinct in postnatal animals despite the potential for extensive cell mixing (see Figure 8). However, our transplantation and fate-mapping studies demonstrate that the lateral somitic frontier lies dorsal to the pigmentation boundary and does not obviously correlate with a difference in skin morphology. An additional dorsoventral domain that is not externally apparent has emerged from studies of Msx1, whose expression marks a subgroup of somite-derived mesenchymal cells that contribute to dermis in a narrow stripe along the paraspinal region (Houzelstein et al. 2000). Thus, there exist at least three distinct boundaries in postnatal mammalian skin that are parallel to the sagittal plane, marked by differences in pigment-type synthesis, differences in cell lineage, and differences in expression of Msx1.

In rodents, only the pigmentation boundary is evident externally, but many mammals have more complicated patterns of hair type, length, and/or color that vary along the dorsoventral axis. Raccoons, squirrels, skunks, and many different ungulates exhibit lateral stripes whose developmental origins have not been investigated, but may correspond to the lateral somitic frontier, the paraspinal Msx1 compartment, or an interaction between these domains.

The effect of Tbx15 on pigmentation in laboratory mice is reminiscent of coat-color patterns in both selected and natural populations of other mammals. Saddle markings are common in some dog breeds, such as German shepherds, and in certain populations of Peromyscus polionotus, in which a dorsal extension of ventral depigmentation provides an adaptive advantage to subspecies that live on white sand reefs (Blair 1951; Kaufman 1974; Belk and Smith 1996). Neither German shepherds nor deer mice have craniofacial characteristics similar to the deH mutation, but the pigmentation patterns in these animals could represent alterations in the regulation or action of Tbx15 activity. From the opposite perspective, the effects of Tbx15 on coat color are only apparent in certain genetic backgrounds and may not be evident at all in mammals that lack dorsoventral pigmentation patterns. Studying the sequence and expression of Tbx15 in other vertebrates may provide additional insight into patterns that affect the skeleton as well as the pigmentary system.

Materials and Methods



Mice

All mice were obtained originally from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine, United States), except the BA strain (Stanford Veterinary Services Center, Stanford, California, United States), Hoxb6-Cre transgenic mice (kindly provided by M. Kuehn of the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States), mice carrying the R26R lacZ reporter allele (kindly provided by P. Soriano, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States), and C57BL/6J (B6) ae/ae mice (kindly provided by L. Siracusa, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States). The deH mutation arose in the 1960s in Harwell, probably on the BN strain background (C. Beechey, personal communication). We obtained deH on a B6/EiC3H background, introduced the at allele from the BTBR strain, and have maintained the line as a mixed deH/+ × deH/+ intercross stock with periodic outcrossing to BTBR or B6. For timed matings, the morning of the plug was considered E0.5. Postnatally, the day of birth was considered to be P0.5.

Phenotypic analysis

For measurements of hair length and color, the entire interlimb region of skin was first dissected with a single incision at the dorsal midline and preserved with powdered sodium bicarbonate. Slices 2–2.5 mm in width were then prepared parallel to the dorsoventral axis, hair length boundaries determined from electronic images with Adobe Photoshop (San Jose, California, United States), and measurements obtained using ImageJ (National Institutes of Health). This approach samples awls and auchenes, because they are much thicker and therefore visually more predominant than zigzag underhairs. To assess dorsoventral variation in hair-type distribution, several hundred hairs were plucked from the middorsum or midventrum of 8-wk-old male BA strain animals, then sorted and categorized using a dissection microscope. No attempt was made to distinguish between awls and auchenes.

For skin histology, 12 μm sections from paraffin-embedded tissue were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. For DOPA staining, the dermis and epidermis were split after 3 h of incubation in 2 M sodium bromide at 37°C (this preparation causes most hair follicles to remain with the dermis), individually fixed for 1 h, then rinsed and stained with 0.1% L-DOPA (Sigma, St. Louis, Missouri, United States), 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6.8) for 5 h at 37°C in the dark, changing the staining solution after 1 h. The samples were then fixed overnight, dehydrated, and mounted. This method is sufficient to stain interfollicular melanocytes without creating a high background. The fixative used was always 4% paraformaldehyde.

Positional cloning

A high-resolution map for deH was generated from an intersubspecific intercross between deH/deH and CAST/Ei mice. We initially localized deH to a 1 cM interval between D3Mit233 and D3Mit11. F2 animals carrying recombinant chromosomes between these markers whose genotype at de was indeterminate (deH/+ or +/+) were progeny-tested by crossing to deH/deH animals. Further genetic mapping established a minimal region of 0.1 cM between D3Mit213 and 16.MMHAP32FLF1; these markers were used to initiate construction of a physical map with BAC genomic clones (Research Genetics, Huntsville, Alabama, United States, and Genome Systems, St. Louis, Missouri, United States). End sequence from those BACs was used to develop SSCP markers M1 to M3, as depicted in Figure 3, and to establish a minimal physical interval of 1.4 Mb. Primer pairs used were TTCCCTCCAATAAGTTCTGGGTACC and AAGCTTGCTGCTCTGGATTCCATTTGTAG for M1, CCTTCATTTTTTTTTCAAGTAAAA and AAGCTTGGCTTAGTCCCAGTGGC for M2, CCTCCAGGAAGATCTACTAGGCAC and ATGGAAAAAAAAAAGTAAGATTGAAAG for M3, and TGGTTATCGATCTGTGGACCATTC and AAGTGAGAGAGCAGGATGGACCAC for M4 (the M4 marker represents STS 16.MMHAP32FLF1). Genomic sequence and annotations were obtained from the UCSC Genome Browser February 2003 assembly version mm3 (http://genome.ucsc.edu); the 1.4 Mb interval between M1 and M4 contains eight genes: four hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase isomerases, Hsd3b3, Hsd3b2, Hsd3b6, and Hsd3b1; an hydroacid oxidase, Hao3; a tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase, Wars2; a T-box gene, Tbx15; and a novel gene, 4931427F14Rik. In the genome sequence, M1 primers correspond to AGGCCTCCAATAAGTTCTGGGTACC and AAGCTTGCTCTCTGGATTCCATTTGTAG, the M2 reverse primer corresponds to AAGCTTGGCTTTAGTCCCAGTGGGC, and the M3 primers correspond to CCTCCAGGAAGAATCTACTAGGCAC and AATGAAAAAAAAAAAAGTAAGATTGAAAG. Minor differences among the sequences of the primers we obtained from the BAC ends and the public genome sequence may represent strain differences or sequencing errors on the BAC DNA.

A multiplex genotyping assay was developed to genotype for the deH deletion using primers GGAGCAGATCCAATTGCTTT, TCCATAGCCCATCTTCACAA, and CATGTCCACTTCTGCTTCCA. This PCR assay produces a 392 bp product from the deH chromosome and a 595 bp product from the nonmutant chromosome.

Gene targeting

A targeted allele of Tbx15 was constructed using the same approach described in Russ et al. (2000). In brief, an IRES-LacZ-neo cassette with 5′ and 3′ homology arms of 3.5 kb and 1.8 kb was inserted into a unique BamHI site that lies 479 nucleotides downstream of the transcriptional initiation site (relative to the mRNA sequence) in exon 3. Positive ES clones were injected into B6 blastocysts, and chimeric founders crossed to either B6 mice or to deH/+ animals.

In situ hybridization

In situ hybridization was carried out on 12-μm paraffin sections using digoxigenin-labeled RNA probes (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States) according to standard protocols (Wilkinson and Nieto 1993). Embryos and postnatal skin samples were obtained from intercrosses of deH/+ mice. Embryos E13.5 or younger were fixed for 24 h; those older than E13.5 and postnatal skin were fixed for 36–48 h prior to embedding. The Tbx15 probe was generated by RT–PCR using primers GGCGGCTAAAATGAGTGAAC and TGCCTGCTTTGGTGATGAT (corresponds to exons 1 and 2), and the En1 probe was generated by PCR from genomic DNA using primers ACGCACCAGGAAGCTAAAGA and AGCAACGAAAACGAAACTGG (located in the last exon). The Agouti probe corresponds to the protein-coding sequence.

Embryonic skin transplantation

(BTBR-at/at × B6-a/a)F1 embryos at E12.5 were dissected in sterile Tyrode's solution, and embryonic skin was divided into dorsal, flank, and ventral pieces, each 1–2 mm2 in size, as shown in Figure 7. Skin fragments were grafted to the testes of congenic animals as follows. After anesthetization with 2.5% Avertin, a 1.5-cm incision in the skin and body wall was made at a point level with the top of the limbs. The fat pads were pulled out and laid on the outside of the body, exposing the testes. Forceps were used to introduce a small hole in the testis capsule through which a piece of dissected embryonic skin was inserted, the testes were then replaced into the abdominal cavity, and the wound was closed in both the body wall and the skin. After 21 days, mice that received grafts were sacrificed and the resulting hair was dissected from the testes and examined.

Fate-mapping the lateral somitic frontier

The Hoxb6-Cre transgene described by Kuehn and colleagues (Lowe et al. 2000) is expressed in the lateral plate but not the somitic mesoderm of the trunk, beginning at E9.5. Animals doubly heterozygous for this transgene and the R26R reporter gene were used as a source of whole skin at P1.5 or P4.5. Skin sections parallel to the dorsoventral axis were prepared with a single incision along the ventral midline and stained for β-galactosidase activity using standard protocols at room temperature. The P1.5 sample was stained overnight and the P4.5 samples were stained for 5.5 h. Similar nonstained skin sections were prepared from animals carrying the at allele. Images of the different skin fragments were aligned and scaled, and the relative position of the somite–lateral plate and the pigmentation boundaries were measured using ImageJ.

Supporting Information

The GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/index.html) accession numbers discussed in this paper are for 4931427F14Rik (AK016477), Agouti gene (L06451), Alx3 (U96109), Alx4 (AF001465), En1(L12703), M6pr-ps (X64069), Tbx14 (AF013282), Tbx15 (AF041822), Tbx18 (AF306666), and Tbx22 (NM_145224).

The OMIM (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/) accession numbers discussed in this paper are for acromegaloid facial appearance (MIM 102150), frontofacionasal syndrome (MIM 229400) and human syndrome X-linked cleft palate and ankyloglossia (MIM 303400).

Acknowledgements

We thank Colin Beechey and Bruce Cattanach for providing information about the origin of deH, Cindy Loomis for communicating unpublished results, and Michael Kuehn for providing Hoxb6-Cre transgenic mice. We are especially grateful to Hirotake Ono for discussion, to Hermie Manuel and to Carla Kroon-Veenboer for technical help, and to David Kingsley for first drawing our attention to the effects of droopy ear on pigmentation. SIC is supported by a grant from The Donald E. and Delia B. Baxter Foundation. GSB is an associate investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

Abbreviations

ae - extreme nonagouti allele

AFA - acromegaloid facial appearance

at - black-and-tan allele

AW - white-bellied Agouti allele

B6 - C57BL/6J mice

BAC - bacterial artificial chromosome

deH - droopy ear allele that arose in Harwell

E10.5 - embryonic day 10.5

En1 - Engrailed1

M6pr-ps - mannose-6-phosphate receptor pseudogene

P4.5 - postnatal day 4.5

Tbx15 - T-box gene 15

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Dorsoventral Skin Characteristics

(A) Skin slices from animals of different age and genotype demonstrate similar patterns of hair-length variation along the dorsoventral axis (scale bar = 1 cm).

(B) Enlarged area from (A), demonstrating the transition in hair length and color in at/at mice (scale bar = 0.375 cm).

(C) Proportional hair length for (A) plotted as a function of relative position along the dorsoventral axis.

(D) Hair length plotted as a function of absolute position along the dorsoventral axis for 8-wk-old BA strain mice.

(E) Proportion of zigzag hairs (± SEM) differs slightly between dorsum and ventrum of inbred mice (p < 0.0001, χ2 test, n = 1,958, 1,477, 1,579, 1,502).

(F) Differences in dorsal and ventral skin development at P4.5 (scale bar = 1 mm, upper; 200 μm, lower).

(G) Differences in hair melanin content and DOPA staining for dorsum (d), flank (f), and ventrum (v) in ae/ae and at/at mice. The upper panel also demonstrates a cream-colored appearance of the at/at ventrum. The middle panel shows representative awls (scale bar = 100 μm). The lower panel shows DOPA-stained dermis (scale bar = 200 μm).

Figure 2

The deH Pigmentation Phenotype

(A) 10-wk-old deH/deH and nonmutant animals on a at background. A thin stripe of yellow hair normally separates the dorsal black hairs from the ventral cream hairs. In deH, the yellow stripe is extended dorsally, and the boundary between the yellow and the black hairs is fuzzier.

(B) Skin slices taken from 1.5-mo-old deH/deH and nonmutant littermates (scale bar = 0.5 cm).

(C) Proportion of total skin area as determined by observation of pelts taken from the interlimb region. The proportion occupied by the yellow lateral compartment (± SEM) differs between mutant and nonmutant littermate flanks (p < 0.0005, paired t-test, n = 6 pairs). There is also (data not shown) a small increase in the proportion of total skin area occupied by the ventral cream-colored compartment, 47.9 % in mutant compared to 37.8% in nonmutant (p < 0.005, paired t-test, n = 6 pairs).

(D) On an ae/ae background, the extent of dorsal skin pigmentation is reduced in deH/deH neonates (P3.5).

(E) Hair length in a representative pair of 1.5-mo-old deH/deH and nonmutant littermates, averaged over three skin slices at different rostrocaudal levels, and plotted as a function of the absolute distance from middorsum or the percentage of total slice length.

Figure 3

Molecular Genetics of deH and Tbx15

(A) Genetic and physical map, as described in the text. Markers M1 to M3 are SSCP markers generated from a BAC contig of the region; marker M4 is STS 16.MMHAP32FLF1 and was also used as an SSCP marker. M2 and M3, which flank the Tbx15 and M6pr-ps on the UCSC genome browser map and lie 634 kb apart, were nonrecombinant with deH in 2340 meioses.

(B) The deH mutation is a deletion that starts in Tbx15 intron 1 and ends in the M6pr-ps.

(C) Sequence of deletion breakpoints.

(D) Diagram of Tbx15LacZ allele constructed by gene targeting. As described in the text, this allele is predicted to give rise to a protein truncated after approximately 154 codons and is lacking critical residues of the T box. Heterozygotes for the targeted allele exhibit normal size, morphology, and hair-color patterns, but homozygotes and Tbx15LacZ/deH compound heterozygotes are identical to deH homozygotes.

Figure 4

Developmental Expression of Tbx15

(A) At E12.5, transverse sections at different levels show expression in head mesenchyme (a and b); myotome, occipital, and periocular mesenchyme (b); palatal shelf, cervical sclerotome, and nasal cartilage (c); maxillary and mandibular processes (d); limbs (e); and myotome and lateral mesenchyme (e and f) (scale bars = 500 μm).

(B) Transverse sections through the flank at different times show expression in lateral mesenchyme (E11.5), expanding dorsally at E12.5, and both ventrally and dorsally at E13.5, detectable in loose mesenchyme underlying the dermis and the abdominal and subcutaneous muscles (scale bar = 500 μm). At P3.5, Tbx15 is expressed in the entire dermis and is most strongly expressed in dermal sheaths (scale bar = 200 μm).

Figure 5

Embryonic Expression of Tbx15 Compared to Agouti in at/at Mice

(A and C) Tbx15. (B and D) Agouti. At E12.5, expression of Tbx15 in dorsal skin is approximately complementary to that of Agouti in ventral skin. At E14.5, the levels of expression for both genes are lower, but Tbx15 expression has expanded ventrally and overlaps extensively with that of Agouti. In all four panels, arrows mark the approximate ventral limit of Tbx15 and the approximate dorsal limit of Agouti (scale bars = 500 μm).

Figure 6

Effect of deH on Agouti Expression

Comparable sections from at/at; deH/deH and at/at; +/+ littermates.

(A) At E14.5, deH/deH embryos have a smaller body cavity and loose skin within which Agouti expression appears to be shifted dorsally, as marked by arrows (scale bars = 500 μm).

(B) At P4.5, Agouti expression in both dorsal and ventral skin is similar in deH/deH compared to nonmutant, but in the midflank region, there is increased Agouti expression in deH/deH, especially in the upper dermis (scale bars = 200 μm). Sections shown are representative of two mutant and two nonmutant samples examined at each time.

Figure 7

Embryonic Establishment of Dorsoventral Skin Patterning

Pieces of skin from dorsal, flank, and ventral regions of at/a E12.5 embryos were transplanted into the testes of congenic animals as described in the text. Hair color of the grafts was examined 3 wk later. Grafts of ventral embryonic skin (n = 3) produced yellow hairs, dorsal embryonic skin (n = 4) produced black hairs, and flank embryonic skin produced mostly (13 out of 15) black and yellow hairs in distinct regions as shown. In parallel, in situ hybridization studies revealed that the embryonic flank contains the boundary of expression between Agouti and Tbx15 (scale bars = 1 mm for hairs and 200 μm for in situ hybridization results).

Figure 8

Comparison of the Dorsoventral at/at Pigmentation Boundary to the Lateral Somitic Frontier

(A) Dorsoventral slices of skin from at the midtrunk region prepared such that the dorsal midline lies in the center of the slice. Sections were taken at P1.5 (a) or P4.5 (b–e) from at/at or R26R/+; Tg.Hoxb6-Cre/+ mice (the latter were stained with X-Gal), as described in Materials and Methods. For purposes of comparison, images were proportionally scaled. The boundary of X-Gal staining marks dermis derived from lateral plate versus dermis derived from mesoderm (the lateral somitic frontier) and lies more dorsal than the at/at pigmentation boundary.

(B) Quantitation of mean (± SEM) dorsal pigmentation area (n = 5) and somite-derived dermis area (n = 3) shows a significant difference (p < 0.005, t-test).

(C) RNA in situ hybridization showing that Tbx15 expression at E11.5 is complementary to En1 expression on the flank (scale bars = 200 μm). The arrow indicates the boundary between the expression domains of the two genes.

Figure 9

Model for Acquisition of Dorsoventral Patterning in the Trunk and the Role of Tbx15

(A) A tricolor pigmentation pattern is generated by the combination of distinct mechanisms that affect distribution of Agouti mRNA and histochemical staining for melanocytes; effects of the latter mechanism by itself are evident in ae/ae mice (see Figure 1). In at/at mice, reduced hair melanocyte activity and high levels of Agouti mRNA in the ventrum lead to a cream color; as melanocyte activity gradually increases towards the dorsum, a lateral stripe is apparent on the flank. The distributions of Agouti mRNA and histochemical staining for melanocytes are both affected by Tbx15 and are externally evident by a widening of the lateral stripe and an increased proportion of total skin occupied by the cream-colored area.

(B) The lateral yellow stripe in at/at mice lies at the same level as the limb dorsoventral boundary. As described in the text, we propose that distinct dorsoventral compartments in ectoderm of the trunk provide an instructional cue to the mesoderm, leading to expression of Tbx15 in dorsal trunk mesenchyme and acquisition of dorsal dermis character. In the absence of Tbx15, dorsal mesenchyme assumes ventral characteristics instead.

Footnotes

Conflicts of interest. The authors have declared that no conflicts of interest exist.

Author contributions. SIC and GSB conceived and designed the experiments. SIC, CDVR, CC, AR, and SK performed the experiments. SIC, CDVR, CC, SK, and FM analyzed the data. YC and AR contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools. SIC and GSB wrote the paper.

Academic Editor: Brigid L. M. Hogan, Duke University Medical CenterLate gestational lung hypoplasia in a mouse model of the Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome

Abstract

Background

Normal post-squalene cholesterol biosynthesis is important for mammalian embryonic development. Neonatal mice lacking functional dehydrocholesterol Δ7-reductase (Dhcr7), a model for the human disease of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, die within 24 hours of birth. Although they have a number of biochemical and structural abnormalities, one cause of death is from apparent respiratory failure due to developmental pulmonary abnormalities.

Results

In this study, we characterized further the role of cholesterol deficiency in lung development of these mice. Significant growth retardation, beginning at E14.5~E16.5, was observed in Dhcr7-/- embryos. Normal lobation but smaller lungs with a significant decrease in lung-to-body weight ratio was noted in Dhcr7-/- embryos, compared to controls. Lung branching morphogenesis was comparable between Dhcr7-/- and controls at early stages, but delayed saccular development was visible in all Dhcr7-/- embryos from E17.5 onwards. Impaired pre-alveolar development of varying severity, inhibited cell proliferation, delayed differentiation of type I alveolar epithelial cells (AECs) and delayed vascular development were all evident in knockout lungs. Differentiation of type II AECs was apparently normal as judged by surfactant protein (SP) mRNAs and SP-C immunostaining. A significant amount of cholesterol was detectable in knockout lungs, implicating some maternal transfer of cholesterol. No significant differences of the spatial-temporal localization of sonic hedgehog (Shh) or its downstream targets by immunohistochemistry were detected between knockout and wild-type lungs and Shh autoprocessing occurred normally in tissues from Dhcr7-/- embryos.

Conclusion

Our data indicated that cholesterol deficiency caused by Dhcr7 null was associated with a distinct lung saccular hypoplasia, characterized by failure to terminally differentiate alveolar sacs, a delayed differentiation of type I AECs and an immature vascular network at late gestational stages. The molecular mechanism of impaired lung development associated with sterol deficiency by Dhcr7 loss is still unknown, but these results do not support the involvement of dysregulated Shh-Patched-Gli pathway in causing this defect.

Background

Cholesterol is a necessary membrane constituent of all mammalian, reptile and avian cells, as well as a few other organisms, but not all eukaryotic organisms. In the latter cases, such as plants and fungi, cholesterol-like sterols (phytosterols, ergosterol etc.) seem to substitute for cholesterol. The precise need for sterols in biological membranes still remains poorly defined, though its link with microdomains (variously termed rafts, caveoli etc.) may be part of the answer [1]. Although the accumulation of cholesterol in atherosclerotic plaques has led to the concept that 'too much' cholesterol may be deleterious, too little cholesterol has now been proven pathophysiological for abnormal embryonic development. Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS, MIM 270400), a relative common dysmorphology disorder, is caused by mutations in DHCR7 [2-5], which encodes for 7-dehydrocholesterol Δ7-reductase and catalyzes a final step of cholesterol biosynthesis. Recognition of other dysmorphology syndromes caused by defects in the post-squalene cholesterol biosynthesis pathway, such as desmosterolosis, lathosterolosis, X-linked chondrodysplasia punctanta and CHILD syndrome [6-15], has strengthened this concept.

Genetic disruption of the Dhcr7 results in neonatal lethality [16]. Neonatal mice homozygous for the Dhcr7 gene disruption are deficient in cholesterol and have increased accumulation of the cholesterol precursor 7-dehydrocholesterol (7DHC). Although no embryonic lethality was noted, these knockout pups exhibited a number of developmental abnormalities and died within 24 h after birth. A similar mouse SLOS model, generated by replacing exons 3, 4 and part of exon 5 of the murine Dhcr7 gene, with similar biochemical and structural defects and a 100 % neonatal lethality, has also been reported [17]. Poor lung development or diffuse lung alveolar atelectasis with cyanotic and lethargic breathing are consistent between both Dhcr7 null models [16,17], and therefore is the likely reason for the respiratory insufficiency and subsequent death of Dhcr7-/- pups. These Dhcr7 knockout mice are models for human SLOS, especially the more severely affected patients, since early postnatal lethality with respiratory failure has been reported in severe SLOS cases [4,5]. Developmental lung abnormalities are also relatively common in SLOS patients, including pulmonary hypoplasia, abnormal pulmonary lobation and pulmonary arteries, anomalies of laryngeal and tracheal development [18].

Mammalian lung is unique in that it is fully developed, but does not function for gas exchange until at the moment of birth; the majority of structural development and maturation takes place in utero. Lung development is a complex process that involves branching morphogenesis of epithelium, interstitial development including vasculogenesis, cellular differentiation, biochemical maturation and physical growth. Four stages of mouse lung development have been described, based upon the histological appearances of lung; pseudoglandular, canalicular, terminal saccular and alveolar stages [19].

Impaired hedgehog function has been proposed as a mechanism underlying malformations found in SLOS. Hedgehog family members play diverse roles in embryonic development, and cholesterol is necessary for maturation of these morphogens [20-23]. The sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling cascade has been shown to play a central role in lung development [24-26]. Loss of Shh function resulted in severe lung defects associated with loss of branching morphogenesis, but preserved proximal-to-distal differentiation of lung epithelium [24]. Overexpression of Shh in the distal lung epithelium resulted in the absence of functional alveoli and an increase in interstitial tissue caused by an increased proliferation of both epithelial and mesenchyme cells [26]. Mice with Shh overexpression died less than 24 h after birth, probably owing to respiratory failure. It has been reported that inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis by chemical inhibitors of Dhcr7 also led to a disturbance of the Shh signaling with abnormal embryogenesis [27,28], and severe sterol deprivation can indeed inhibit the processing of transfected Shh in cultured mammalian cells [29].

In the present studies, we characterized lung development in Dhcr7-/- embryos from E10.5 to birth. Our results showed that cholesterol deficiency, caused by loss of Dhcr7 activity, did not alter lung branching morphogenesis (early gestational stages, E9.5 to E14.5). However, lung saccular development was impaired, with arrested or partially developed epithelial tubules and delayed vascular development. Differentiation of type II alveolar epithelial cells (AECs) appeared normal but differentiation of type I AECs was severely impaired. Therefore, cholesterol deficiency resulted in a distinct late gestational lung hypoplasia, characterized by impaired sacculation with delayed type I AECs differentiation and immature vascular development. However, this study does not support the concept that the perturbation of Shh-Patched-Gli pathway was involved in the pathogenesis of developmental lung hypoplasia in Dhcr7-/- embryos. Patterns of expression of Shh signaling cascade members were not altered, and processing of Shh appeared normal.

Results

Body growth retardation at late gestation stage in Dhcr7-/- embryos

Dhcr7-/- mice were born in the expected Mendelian ratios from heterozygous parents, but all of these pups died within 24 h and most within 14 h of birth [16]. At birth, they were clearly smaller than wild-type or heterozygous littermates. An experienced investigator can pick out knockout pups based on this along with presence of hypoxia and their lack of spontaneous movement. The breathing frequency in P0 Dhcr7-/- pups was markedly slower than control littermates (34 ± 7 breaths/min in Dhcr7-/-, n = 10 vs. 92 ± 16 breaths/min in controls, n = 32, p < 0.001) and the breathing was observed to be more irregular and shallow, with long periods of apnea.

To determine the gestational stage at which growth of the knockout embryos was affected, embryos were harvested at various stages of gestation and their body lengths compared between Dhcr7-/- and controls. A linear increase in body length from E9.5 to E19.5 in control embryos was observed (Fig. 1). No significant differences in body length between wild-type and heterozygous embryos were noted (data not shown). In contrast, knockout embryos showed comparable body length growth until E14.5~E16.5, then began to show a slower increase in length, such that by E17.5, this was statistically significant (18.87 ± 1.29 mm in controls, n = 15 compared to 16.69 ± 1.05 mm in Dhcr7-/-, n = 7, p < 0.05, Fig. 1).

Figure 1

Body length growth curves. Body length growth vs. gestational days is as shown. Control embryos (filled triangles, wild-type and heterozygous embryos were pooled together as there were no differences between these two groups) and knockout embryos (filled circles) were as shown. The growth curve showed a linear increase from E9.5 to E19.5 in controls, but deviated at ~E14.5 in Dhcr7-/- embryos. Body lengths at E17.5 (18.87 ± 1.29 mm in controls, n = 15 vs. 16.69 ± 1.05 mm in Dhcr7-/-, n = 7, p < 0.05), E18.5 (21.35 ± 1.05 mm in controls, n = 15 vs. 19.38 ± 0.9 mm in Dhcr7-/-, n = 5, p < 0.05) and E19.5 (23.4 ± 0.97 mm in controls, n = 13 vs. 20.3 ± 0.44 mm in Dhcr7-/-, n = 4, p < 0.05) were significantly decreased, compared to those in controls. Results are expressed as mean ± s.d.

Dhcr7-/- embryos at late stages displayed pulmonary hypoplasia with delayed saccular development

Wet lung weights, as well as lung to body weight ratios were significantly lower in Dhcr7-/- at E18.5 compared to those in wild-type but not at E13.5 (Table 1). Both body and lung weights were reduced, but lungs seemed to be more affected. A representative figure of embryos at E10.5 and of the pups at birth was shown in Fig. 2A and 2B.

Table 1

Whole body and lung weights of mouse embryos

* p < 0.05, compared to Dhcr7+/+. BW, body weight; LW, lung weight.

Figure 2

Embryonic size, lung morphology and histology at various stages of development. Panel A shows the size and general morphology of wild-type (+/+) and Dhcr7-/- (-/-) embryos at E10.5, without significant difference. At P0, the knockout pups were significantly smaller and appeared hypoxic (panel B). Panel C shows dorsal views of lungs from knockout and wild-type at E13.5 and panel D those at P0. Cross-sectional examination at the cardiopulmonary level at E 20.5 (prior to birth) showed normal lobar septation, but lungs from knockout animals were smaller in size and had less distal sac space (cf. panels E and F). Original magnification: Panels A and C, 2X; panels B and D, 0.7X; E and F, 2X. Labels: r, right; l, left; b, bronchial; br, bronchiole; e, esophagus; pa, pulmonary artery; ra, right atrium; la, left atrium; rv, right ventricle; lv, left ventricle.

We examined the lungs for any gross morphological abnormalities. The overall organogenesis of lungs was preserved in Dhcr7-/- pups; four right lung lobes and a single left lobe flanking the heart were easily seen on external examination at birth (Fig. 2D). Examination for lobation at E13.5 also showed comparable gross anatomy (Fig. 2C) between wild-type and knockout embryos. Histological analyses of the cardiopulmonary structures at E20.5, taken just before birth to avoid artifacts from lack of lung inflation, also confirmed normal gross anatomic development (Fig. 2E and 2F). Additionally, no cardiac defects were identified and this was confirmed by more detailed histological analyses (data not shown). Thus, despite the obvious hypoxia frequently observed at birth of the knockout pups, major cardiac structural abnormalities were not observed to account for this phenotype.

No distinguishable morphological differences were discernable between Dhcr7-/- and wild-type lungs at E10.5, E13.5, E14.5 and E16.5 at low (10X) or high (40X) magnifications (Fig. 3, panel A: a-h, data for E10.5 and E13.5 not shown). However, from E17.5 onwards, lungs from knockout embryos appeared to have less saccular space and relatively more mesenchyme compared to wild-type lungs (Fig. 3, panel A: I-x). Lungs from control animals showed normal progression with formation of sac-like structures, the precursors of the alveoli (Fig. 3, panel A: i, m, q and u). In lungs from knockout embryos, expansion of epithelial tubules occurred but was significantly delayed (Fig. 3, cf. panel A: j, n, r, v with i, m, q and u). Morphometric measurements of lung sections at E17.5, E18.5, E20.5 and in lungs from neonates showed that the proportion of terminal sac space area was significantly decreased in Dhcr7-/- lungs, compared wild-type lungs (Fig. 3, panel B). Interstitial mesenchyme appeared thicker and the lungs had less septation compared to control lungs. This 'thickening' of the alveoli may explain the hypoxia frequently seen in Dhcr7-/- pups at birth.

Figure 3

Histological analyses of lungs at various embryonic stages. Panel A indicates lung sections stained with H and E, and taken at various gestational stages as indicated. The first two columns are at lower magnification (10X) and the last two columns at higher magnification (40X). The first and third columns are representative sections from wild-type (+/+) embryos and the second and fourth columns from knockout (-/-) embryos. No differences were visible at E14.5 or E16.5 (panel A, a-h). Significant differences were visible from E17.5 onwards (panel A, i-x). Distal tubules showed dilation and mesenchyme thinning, with progression of septation in wild-type lungs (panel A, i, m and q), whereas the knockout lungs showed less saccular structures and more mesenchyme (panel A, j, n and r). At higher magnifications of wild-type lungs (panel A, k, o and s), developing pre-alveoli and thinning mesenchyme (arrowheads) were seen but sections from knockout embryos showed a delay in this sequence of development (panel A, l, p and t). At birth, lungs from knockout pups showed deficient septation and thick-walled mesenchyme (panel A, x, arrowheads). Labels: de, distal epithelium; m, mesenchyme; PA, pulmonary artery; a, pre-alveoli; b, bronchi. Panel B shows the morphometric analyses of lung terminal sac spaces in lungs at various gestational stages. A significant reduction in the terminal sac space was noted from E17.5 onwards. Results are expressed as mean ± s.d.

Attenuated cell proliferation in late gestational Dhcr7-/- lungs

Does the loss of normal cholesterol biosynthesis lead to abnormalities of cell proliferation/division or cell death? Cell proliferation was examined by immunostaining for PCNA and also by BrdU incorporation. Both PCNA and BrdU staining of wild-type and knockout lungs at early gestational stages (E13.5 and E14.5) showed comparable patterns (Fig. 4, panels A-D). However, a clear reduction of PCNA and BrdU labeling was visualized in distal lungs of knockout embryos at late gestational stages (E18.5 and E20.5, Fig. 4, panels E-H). Attenuated PCNA labeling was also noted in knockout hearts at term (Fig. 4, cf. panels I and J). When lungs were stained for pHH3, a marker of active cell division, a clear reduction of pHH3 expression in the epithelium of knockout lung was observed at E20.5 but not at E14.5 (Fig. 4, panels K, L, O and P). In contrast, using the TUNEL assay, no apparent differences in cell apoptosis rates were observed between wild-type and knockout lungs at E18.5 (Fig. 4, cf. panels M and N). Thus, at the late gestational stages, cell proliferation/division was impaired in knockout embryos with no increase in cell death rates.

Figure 4

Analyses of cell proliferation, cell division and cell death. Cell proliferation (PCNA: panels A, B, E and F; BrdU: panels C, D, G and H), cell division (pHH3: panels K, L, O and P) and cell death (TUNEL: panels M and N) were analyzed by immunostaining on lung sections at early and late gestational stages. Both PCNA and BrdU labeled cells in both epithelial and mesenchymal regions were comparable at early stages (E14.5 for PCNA and E13.5 for BrdU) between wild-type (+/+) and knockout (-/-) lungs. Positively stained cells in distal lungs at late stage (E20.5 for PCNA and E18.5 for BrdU) from knockout lungs were markedly reduced, compared with wild-type. PCNA labeling of cardiac muscle was also attenuated in knockout embryos at E20.5 (cf. panels I and J). No apparent differences in TUNEL immunostaining were observed in lung sections at E18.5 between wild-type and knockout. The pHH3 immunostaining was comparable between wild-type and knockout lungs at E14.5, and the lungs from wild-type at E20.5 showed a high index of positive cells, whereas lungs from knockout showed a apparent reduced staining pattern. Note the dividing cells are mainly epithelial. Original magnification: A-D and G-N are 20X; E, F, O and P are 40X.

Sterol content of developing lungs in Dhcr7 deficient mice

Markedly elevated 7-DHC/8-DHC levels and reduced body cholesterol levels have been reported previously in Dhcr7-/- P0 mice [16,17]. A significant amount of cholesterol was detectable in lungs of Dhcr7-/- mice, comprising ~60% and ~30% of total tissue sterols at E13.5 and neonate, respectively. In contrast to the doubling of cholesterol in the lungs of wild type embryos (1.82 mg/g tissue at E13.5 to 3.55 mg/g tissue at P0), cholesterol content in the lungs of Dhcr7 null embryos remained at almost constant low levels between E13.5 and P0 gestational stages (Fig. 5). There was a progressive increase in 7-DHC and 8-DHC; the latter is generated as a spontaneous isomerization from the former. Total sterols at birth were reduced in lungs of the Dhcr7 null mice, but were only lower by ~30% (Fig. 5, see values for P0 mice).

Figure 5

Sterol analyses of embryonic lungs. Sterol contents, including cholesterol (black bars) and 7DHC/8DHC (white bars), were quantitated by GC-MS in the lungs from wild-type (+/+) and knockout (-/-) embryos. Results are expressed as mean ± s.d and the number of lungs analyzed is as indicated. Total sterols were lower at all stages in knockout lungs, with almost no increase in cholesterol content with time (black bars), but there was a progressive increment in the precursor sterols, 7DHC/8DHC (open bars), with increasing gestation.

Cholesterol is absolutely required for steroid hormone synthesis by the adrenal glands. Adrenal insufficiency, as has been reported in some severe cases of SLOS patients, could be responsible for the lung hypoplasia and perinatal lethality [30]. Steroids, but particularly corticosteroids, are necessary for lung maturation, especially the synthesis and secretion of surfactant components [31]. We determined plasma corticosterone levels in P0 mice within 12 h of birth. Wild type P0 mice had corticosterone levels of 158 ± 50 ng/ml (n = 11), compared with 225 ± 50 ng/ml (n = 7, p < 0.01) in Dhcr7-/- P0 mice. Thus, the corticosterone levels in Dhcr7-/- mice were not decreased, but increased by ~40%. However, since these P0 mice were dying, perhaps this increase was sub-optimal given the stress. Nevertheless, an absolute lack of corticosterone was not present in these knockout pups.

To further rule out any effects of corticosterone deficiency on lung immaturity, we examined lungs for surfactant protein expression. Surfactant protein C, as determined by IHC, was comparable in lung sections from wild-type or Dhcr7 null embryos at either E18.5 or at E20.5 gestational ages (Fig. 6, panel A). Northern analyses for SP-A, SP-B, SP-C or SP-D showed no significantly differences between wild-type and Dhcr7 null mice at term (Fig. 6, panel B). Thus, surfactant protein expression was not altered by Dhcr7 deficiency.

Figure 6

Surfactant protein expression in lungs. Panel A shows the immunostaining patterns for SP-C in lungs at E18.5 and E20.5 from wild-type (+/+) and knockout (-/-) embryos. No significant differences in the patterns of SP-C staining were evident between wild-type and knockout lungs (panel A, a-d). Note that the underdeveloped epithelial tubules in knockout lungs also expressed SP-C (panel A, b and d, arrowheads), indicating normal type II AECs differentiation. Original magnification: 10X. Panel B, left-hand panel, shows a representative result from Northern analyses of total RNA from wild-type, heterozygous and knockout P0 lungs for SP-A, SP-B, SP-C and SP-D expression. Densitometry analyses showed the relative expression (n = 3, mean ± s.d.) of these surfactant protein mRNAs were not significantly different between these three genotypes.

Dhcr7-/- lungs showed abnormal differentiation of type I alveolar epithelial cells (AECs)

At E20.5, the distal lung of wild type embryos consisted of saccular structures lined by flat type I AECs, and by cuboidal surfactant-producing type II AECs (Fig. 7A). In contrast, the formation of these typical saccules was impaired in Dhcr7 deficient lungs. Instead, these saccular structures were lined by a low columnar epithelium that lacked flattened type I-like cells with the presence of many undeveloped or arrested epithelial tubules (Fig. 7B). Consistent with disruption of type I AECs differentiation was the dramatic reduction of expression of T1α, an apical membrane protein marker of lung type I AECs (Fig. 7, cf. panels C and D). Decreased immunostaining for AQP5, another type I AEC marker, was also noted in Dhcr7 deficient lungs at E20.5, compared to control lungs (Fig. 7, cf. panels E and F). Megalin, a low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene family member, is expressed by embryonic epithelial cells and can function as an endocytic Shh receptor [32]. Megalin was highly expressed on the distal epithelium at E20.5 from wild-type lungs, as well as type I AECs lining the developed saccules (Fig. 7G). In contrast, though megalin staining was detected in developing saccules in knockout embryonic lungs, its expression was confined to undifferentiated cuboidal cells (Fig. 7H), further indicating a delay in type I AECs differentiation in the knockout lungs.

Figure 7

Characterization of type I AECs differentiation. The normal distal saccules of wild-type (+/+) at near term (E20.5) showed typical type I (t1) and type II (t2) epithelial cells (panel A, arrowheads), but knockout (-/-) littermate lungs showed less developed saccules lined by columnar epithelial cells (panel B, black arrowheads), with partially arrested tubules in the distal lung (panel B, green arrowheads). Immunostaining for type I cell markers T1α and AQP5 demonstrated an intense staining in flat epithelial cells in wild-type lungs at E20.5 (panels C and E, arrowheads). In contrast, in knockout littermate lungs, T1α and AQP5 staining was dramatically decreased (panels D and F, arrowheads). Megalin expression (Meg) was detected in the airway epithelial cells, but not in proximal bronchiole epithelial cells (data not shown) in the lungs from both wild-type and knockout at E20.5. The elongated megalin-positive epithelial cells, lining the normally developed sacculi, were readily evident in many areas of the wild-type lungs. In contrast, the terminal epithelial cells positively stained by megalin antibodies in knockout lungs were comprised mainly of undifferentiated cuboidal cells (compare the arrowheads in G and H). Original magnification: A, B, G and H are 60X, C-F are 40X.

Delayed vascular development in Dhcr7-/- lungs

There is a close relationship between blood vessel development and lung structural development. At later lung developmental stages, timed capillary bed development is essential for the formation of mature alveolar gas-exchange, with a loss of mesenchyme separating the capillary beds and the AECs [19]. In Dhcr7-/- lungs at late gestational stages, the relative abundance of mesenchyme was consistent with the general arrest in sacculation. To investigate whether the delayed lung sacculation also involved abnormal blood vessel development, immunostaining for the α-isoform of caveolin-1 (cav-1α) and platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecular (PECAM-1) were performed on sections from wild-type and Dhcr7-/- lungs. In the developing lung, cav-1α is expressed strictly in the endothelium of developing capillary and blood vessels. Cav-1α is present in the terminally differentiated type I AECs, but is not detectable in its progenitors or type II AECs [33]. At E14.5, both the epithelium and mesenchyme were negative for cav-1α staining, and cav-1α was detected in the developing blood vessels and capillaries, with no differences observed between wild-type and Dhcr7-/- lungs (Fig. 8, panels A and B). Cav-1α immunostaining demonstrated that the vascular development proceeded rapidly during saccular stages in normal lungs (E17.5 and E20.5). In near-term normal lungs (E20.5), an extensive vascular network, associated with markedly thinned septation walls of well-developed alveoli and close apposition to flat type I AECs, was observed (Fig. 8, panels C and E). In contrast, the cav-1α patterns in lungs from Dhcr7-/- embryos revealed a relatively undeveloped pulmonary capillary bed (Fig. 8, panels D and F). At E20.5, cav-1α stained cells in knockout lungs were embedded in a relatively thick mesenchyme surrounding undeveloped epithelial tubules, and these epithelial cells remained cuboidal, instead of flattening out (Fig. 8, panel F). PECAM-1 staining at E20.5 confirmed the delayed lung vascular development at these late gestational stages in Dhcr7 deficient embryos (Fig. 8, cf. panels G and H).

Figure 8

Immunostaining patterns for caveolin-1α and PECAM-1 in lung sections. Cav-1α staining was compared at E14.5, E17.5 and E20.5 stages of development. Both the epithelium and mesenchyme were negative for cav-1α at E14.5. Developing blood vessels (red arrowheads) and capillaries (arrows) (panels A and B) were stained positively for cav-1α, but the staining patterns between wild-type (+/+) and knockout (-/-) lungs were not altered. Cav-1α was also detected at the proximal bronchiole sub-epithelial matrices (panels A-D, black arrowheads). At E17.5, the airway epithelium, negative for cav-1α staining, was surrounded by rings of cav-1α positively stained capillary networks (panels C and D, arrows). Cav-1α expression patterns in lungs from knockout embryos at E17.5 were similar to wild-type embryos, but relative less capillary bed was noted in knockout lungs (cf. panels C and D). At E20.5 of wild-type lungs, both cav-1α and PECAM-1 staining demonstrated an extensive vascular network in the well developed saccules, with staining observed in close proximity to flat epithelial cells lining the air spaces (panels E and G, arrows). However, delayed vascular development was observed in knockout lungs, showing capillaries (panels F and H, arrows) of the knockout lungs at E20.5 were embedded in a relatively thick mesenchyme around the undeveloped epithelial tubules in which the epithelial cells were remained cuboidal (arrowheads). Original magnification: A-D are 20X; E-H are 40X.

Is the pattern of sonic hedgehog expression or signaling altered in Dhcr7-/- embryos?

Shh is critical for normal embryonic development and its autoprocessing, resulting in a cholesterol molecule covalently attached at its C-terminus, is a necessary step for its regulated signaling function [23,34]. Thus, disruption of cholesterol biosynthesis could conceivably disrupt its pattern of distribution and thus affect normal development. To determine whether aberrant expression of Shh contributed to the Dhcr7-/- lung phenotype, distribution of Shh in the Dhcr7-/- and wild-type lungs was assessed from E10.5 to P0 by IHC using Shh-N peptide antibody. At E10.5, the distribution of Shh was detected in the epithelial cells of lung buds (Fig. 9, left panel: C and D), as well as in the more typical Shh-expressing locations, such as the floor plate, notochord and mid gut (Fig. 9, left panel: A-D). Importantly, no differences between Dhcr7-/- and control embryos were noted. Likewise, examination of lung sections from increasing gestational ages through to birth showed no significant differences between wild-type and Dhcr7 deficient tissues. The patterns of staining observed were comparable to those previously reported for Shh in mouse lungs [25].

Figure 9

Shh and Ptch expression patterns at different gestational stages in Dhcr7-/- and wild-type mice. Left panel shows the Shh immunostaining patterns using an antibody to Shh N-peptide at various gestational stages as indicated by the legend on the y-axis. There were no significant differences noted at any of the stages examined between wild-type (+/+) and knockout (-/-) embryos. At E10.5, Shh was detected in the floor plate (fp), notochord (nc) (A and B), mid-gut (mg) and the epithelial buds of lungs (lb) (C and D). Shh staining was restricted to epithelial cells in the distal region of the primordial tubes of lungs at E13.5 and E15.5. Note that proximal epithelial cells of primordial tubes were not immunostained for Shh (E and F, arrows). Shh was detected in the lung epithelial cells on E18.5, and mainly in the conducting airways in the neonates. Original magnifications: A~H, K and L are 10X, I and J are 20X. Right panel shows the patterns of Ptch IHC at various gestational stages. Immunostaining of Ptch from E13.5 to P 0 confirmed concordance with Shh expression and was not significantly different between wild-type and knockout embryos. Note that the proximal epithelial cells of primordial tubes were also not immunostained for Ptch at E13.5 lungs (arrows). Original magnifications: A~F, I and J are 10X. G and H are 20X.

To further investigate Shh signaling in these embryos, we examined the patterns of expression of Patched (Ptch), a cognate receptor for Shh and one whose expression is also regulated by Shh signaling. The patterns of Ptch in lung sections from various gestational stages were also indistinguishable between wild-type and knockout embryos (Fig. 9, right panels). The expression of Ptch was in concordance with that of Shh (Fig 9, left and right panels), showing lung epithelial cell expression. Downstream of the Shh-Ptch signaling cascade are proteins such as smoothened (Smo), and Gli proteins, key regulators of target-gene expression in response to Shh signaling. No differences in expression patterns for Smo (Fig. 10, upper panels), Gli1 (Fig. 10, middle panels) or Gli3 (Fig. 10, bottom panels) were noted between wild-type and knockout lungs at E13.5, E15.5 and E17.5 gestational days.

Figure 10

Comparisons of Smo, Gli1 and Gli3 expression in lung sections. Smoothened (Smo, upper panel), Gli1 (middle panel) and Gli3 (bottom panel) showed a pattern of distribution similar to that seen with Shh and Ptch (compare to Fig. 7). No differences between wild-type (+/+) and knockout (-/-) embryos were evident. Original magnifications: 20X.

Shh protein processing in Dhcr7-/- embryos

Since Shh expression, as well as some of the Shh signaling components appeared to be normal in Dhcr7-/- embryos, endogenous autoprocessing of Shh to generate a cholesterol-modified N-terminal fragment of Shh (Shh-Np) was evaluated. COS-1 cells, transfected with full length Shh cDNA (capable of endogenous autocleavage) or a truncated Shh cDNA (Shh-N, expression of the shorter form constitutively) were used as controls (Fig. 11, tracks 1 and 2). Transfection of the full-length cDNA for Shh led to the detection of an ~20 kD protein that corresponds with the cleaved and tailed Shh (Fig. 11, track 1), as previously described [35]. Transfection of COS cells with the constitutive truncated Shh-N cDNA led to two slower migrating bands that correspond to truncated Shh, but which are thought to be generated by differences in lipid modifications, as previously demonstrated [35]. In tissue lysates from wild-type, Dhcr7+/- and Dhcr7-/- embryos at E11.5, a band running at the same position as Shh-Np (autocleaved and tailed) was detected in all of the lysates. There were no distinguishable differences between Dhcr7-/- and the wild-type samples, suggesting that Shh autoprocessing occurred normally, despite an absolute deficiency of cholesterol in knockout embryos. More importantly, no band corresponding to a full-length Shh (~45 kD) was present in the lung lysates from the knockout embryos, suggesting that processing of Shh was not impaired.

Figure 11

Shh protein autoprocessing in mouse embryos. Western blotting of lysates from wild-type (track 3), heterozygous (track 4) and knockout (track 5) embryos at E11.5, or COS1 cells transfected with Shh (track 1) or Shh-N (track 2) were probed with anti-Shh-N19 antibodies. 20 μ g of lysate proteins from Shh transfected COS1 cells and 75 μ g from embryos was loaded. Both unprocessed (Shh, upper arrow ~45 kDa, faint signal) and processed (Shh-Np, lowest arrow, strong signal, track 1) forms of Shh were detected from Shh transfected COS1 cells. The two slower migrating bands in Shh-N transfected COS1 cells (track 2) represented Shh-N proteins with different lipid modifications at its N terminus. A major band running at the same position as processed Shh was detected in lysates from all the embryos (tracks 3–5). Importantly, no significant amounts of unprocessed or aberrantly migrating Shh proteins were detected in lysates from knockout embryos at this stage.

Discussion

The elucidation that SLOS is caused by a defect in an enzyme necessary for cholesterol biosynthesis has improved our understanding of embryonic development. This discovery has led to the identification of other disorders of embryonic development caused by mutations in genes encoding other enzymes in the post-squalene steps of cholesterol biosynthesis. Although these genetic studies now implicate the need for normal cholesterol synthesis, the mechanistic role(s) of cholesterol in normal embryonic development remains to be clarified.

In the present study, we report the characterization of lung development in Dhcr7-/- embryos. Although cardiac abnormalities are common in human SLOS [36], no structural abnormalities of the heart or the great vessels were observed in the Dhcr7-/- pups. Lung development in Dhcr7-/- embryos at the early stages, from lung bud formation to canalicular stage, was morphologically similar to controls. Instead, a distinct lung hypoplasia at the saccular stage, characterized by arrested or partially developed distal epithelial tubules, reduced terminal sac space, delayed type I AECs differentiation and delayed vascular development, was consistently observed at late gestational stages in Dhcr7-/- embryos. At late stages of normal fetal development, the mammalian alveolar epithelium undergoes an abrupt differentiation as a part of the preparation of the lungs for the postnatal demands of gas exchange [37]. Both type II AECs, producing pulmonary surfactants, and type I AECs, lining the expanded alveoli, are important for alveolar maturation. In addition, the vascular development of alveoli is also essential for normal lung morphogenesis at late gestational stages [19]. We show here that the differentiation of type I AECs but not type II AECs in Dhcr7-/- lungs was blocked or delayed, as indicated by fewer flattened type I cells and by reduced expression of markers of type I AECs, T1α and AQP5. Delayed vascular development was also involved in the delayed sacculation of Dhcr7-/- lungs. Additionally, the mesenchyme separating the AECs from the vascular beds remained thickened. In support of normal differentiation of type II AECs, no alteration in the gene expression patterns for surfactant proteins A, B, C or D was noted, nor was the pattern of distribution of SP-C altered in lungs from knockout embryos. Thus, impaired gas exchange, as opposed to poor inflation and alveolar tension, may be the cause of respiratory failure in these pups.

Loss of functional Dhcr7 led to a retardation of embryonic growth from E14.5~E16.5 onwards. By this stage, cholesterol levels were already lower and its immediate precursor, 7-DHC, elevated in the lungs (this study) as well as in the whole body [16,17]. Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) followed by postnatal failure to thrive is a universally observed phenotype in SLOS patients [2,18]. We showed here that body length was significantly reduced at later stages of gestation in Dhcr7-/- animals, compared to controls. Whole body weights and fresh lung weights (as well as brain, heart and kidney, data not shown) at late gestational stages were also lower in Dhcr7-/- embryos. Interestingly, the lower lung/body ratios at E18.5 in Dhcr7-/- embryos compared to wild-type suggested a disproportionate inhibition of lung growth than other organs. Cell proliferation and division in Dhcr7-/- lungs were markedly arrested without apparent increase in cell apoptosis. Therefore, it appears that growth retardation caused by cholesterol deficiency was primarily because of an inhibition of cell growth and proliferation, rather than an increase in cell death.

Cholesterol is present in Dhcr7-/- embryos, as it is in Sc5d-/- (lathosterolosis) and Dhcr24-/-(desmosterolosis) embryos [15,38]. Total sterols and cholesterol in Dhcr7-/- embryonic lungs (as well as in brain and liver, data not shown) were reduced and 7DHC/8DHC elevated, but a significant amount of cholesterol was detectable, comprising ~60% and ~30% of total tissue sterols at E13.5 and neonate, respectively. Fetal cholesterol can either be synthesized endogenously in fetal tissues or accrued from extra-embryonic tissues such as maternal serum, placenta, and yolk sac [39]. Since these mice theoretically can not synthesize cholesterol, any accumulation of cholesterol must be derived from the maternal sources. Interestingly, Dhcr24 null mice are viable but contained almost no cholesterol in plasma and tissues at 3-months, whereas cholesterol content in Dhcr24 null embryo tissues accounts for ~60% at E11.5 and ~30% at E17.5, of total tissue sterols [38]. These results, as well as this study, suggest that a considerable amount of maternal cholesterol can be transferred to the murine fetus. One explanation of why the Dhcr24-/- mice are developmentally normal but Dhcr7-/- mice are affected may be because desmosterol can functionally substitute for cholesterol, whereas the other cholesterol precursors can not.

Although a mechanistic understanding of why a deficiency in cholesterol biosynthesis leads to abnormal embryonic development is lacking, a frequently advanced explanation has been that Shh signaling, involved in early developmental patterning, may be disrupted. In the developing lung primordium, Shh is expressed initially at E9 and promotes branching morphogenesis, which is impaired in Shh knockout mice [24], suggesting that Shh, secreted by the epithelium, is critical for branching morphogenesis. In this study, the lack of evidence of abnormal lung branching morphogenesis in the early stages, but a consistent delayed maturation of the gas-exchange region of the lung in the saccular period of development of Dhcr7-/- embryos was observed, suggesting early Shh signaling was normal. Shh protein expression and autoprocessing at E11.5 was indistinguishable between wild-type and Dhcr7-/- embryos. Additionally, although these experiments were not quantitative, the abundance of Shh appeared unchanged between these genotypes. Thus, it is possible that the cholesterol levels (roughly 50% of normal levels) in Dhcr7-/- embryos were enough for completion of Shh autoprocessing or 7DHC accumulated in Dhcr7-/- embryonic tissues can also participate efficiently as a sterol adduct in the Shh processing reaction [20]. In this study, we also examined the Shh signaling pathway by immunohistochemistry of known key components of this pathway, such as patched, smoothened and Gli proteins. Shh signaling leads to the activation of transcription and increased protein levels of these components [40-42]. If Shh signaling were defective in Dhcr7-/- embryos, these could have resulted in abnormalities of the staining patterns of these components, but no such disturbance was detected. Indeed, the patterns of protein expression seemed comparable and indistinguishable from wild-type embryos at all stages of lung development examined.

In a recent in vitro study [43], mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from Dhcr7-/- embryos, grown in lipid-depleted culture and transiently treated with cyclodextrin, showed no affect on Shh processing. However, a deficiency in their ability to respond to Shh activation, as judged by reporter gene expression, was demonstrable. In contrast, when CHO cells, that stably expressed Shh, were subjected to sterol deprivation, an arrest of Shh autoprocessing was clearly demonstrable [29]. In the present study, we did not detect unprocessed Shh in Dhcr7-/- embryonic tissues at E11.5. Subtle differences in Shh signal transduction can not be excluded by the present study. However, we favor a model whereby the loss of normal cholesterol biosynthesis is important, not so much for Shh autocleavage, as for the loss of the correct plasma membrane milieu. Since the loss of cholesterol content in the plasma membrane (and perhaps any membrane) is likely to alter the function of receptors more sensitive to this, loss of normal cholesterol synthesis may cause a loss of signal transduction of a host of such pathways. Thus, this effect may not be limited to the Shh pathway and other targets may be more important. This hypothesis is amenable to testing in the Dhcr7 null mice.

Conclusion

Cholesterol deficiency caused by Dhcr7 deficiency in mice resulted in, along with IUGR, a distinct lung saccular hypoplasia with impaired differentiation of type I but not type II AECs and delayed associated vascular development. Loss of the correct amounts of cholesterol in the membranes may perturb those receptors that depend upon cholesterol for efficient signal transduction. Further investigation of which transcriptional and signal transduction pathways are more significantly affected by the loss of Dhcr7 will be critical to elucidate the mechanism of lung hypoplasia of this model, as well as the role of cholesterol in embryonic development.

Methods

Animals

All mice were housed in an animal facility at 22°C with a 12 h light ~12 h dark cycle and all protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Welfare Committee. Dhcr7 heterozygous animals used in this study have been backcrossed onto a C57BL/6J background for 11 successive generations. The presence of vaginal plugs was considered as embryonic day (E) 0.5. Timed pregnant females were sacrificed, embryos dissected from the uteri and placed in 1X PBS. Crown-rump lengths of the embryos were measured by use of an electronic digital caliper and embryos weighed, after blotting off excess fluid. Each lung was removed intact from the thoracic cavity, blotted free of excess fluid, and weighed. Mice were classified as P0 when birth was witnessed and their breathing activities visualized under a dissecting microscope. Digital images of embryos or lungs were captured using a Zeiss-1000 dissecting microscope. Genotyping was performed by PCR, as described previously [16]. And in selective cases, Southern blotting was performed for confirmation of Dhcr7 genotype.

Biochemical measurements

Tissue sterol compositions were analyzed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) as described previously [2,44]. Serum corticosterone levels were measured by radioimmunoassay (RIA) on the blood obtained from decapitated neonates by a commercial source (DRTC hormone Assay Core Lab, Vanderbilt University, TN).

Histology and Immunohistochemistry

Thoracic parts from embryos or P0 mice were fixed in either Amsterdam's fixative (methanol:acetone:acetic acid:water, 35:35:5:25 v/v) or 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Tissues were fixed overnight at room temperature (RT), rinsed in PBS, dehydrated in a graded ethanol series, cleared in toluene and embedded in paraffin. Five μ m sections were mounted on Superfrost-Plus slides (VWR, West Chester, PA) for histological or immunohistochemistry (IHC) analyses.

IHC was performed using an indirect method. After deparaffination in xylene and rehydration through a graded series of ethanol, sections were heated at 95°C in 10 mM sodium citrate (pH 6.0) for an initial 15 min and for three successive 5-min periods [25]. After cooling, the sections were treated with hydrogen peroxide (3% v/v in PBS, pH7.4) for 10 min and rinsed in the PBS. Sections were blocked with 5% normal serum for 2 h, washed in PBS and incubated with antibodies against Shh-N19 (1:100), Patched (1:100), Smo-N19 (1:100), Gli1 (1:100), Gli3-N19 (1:100), SP-C C19 (1:200), caveolin 1α-N20 (1:200), aquaporin 5 (AQP5, 1:200), megalin (1:200), PECAM-1 (1:200) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) or T1α (mAB 8.1.1, 1:1000 dilution, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, IA) overnight at 4° C in a humidified chamber. The sections were washed in PBS, incubated with biotinylated secondary antibodies (1:1000~1:5000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) in PBS for 2 h at RT, incubated with HRP-streptavidin complex for 30 min, rinsed in PBS and visualized using a Metal Enhanced Diaminobenzidine (DAB) Substrate Kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Digital images were collected using a Polaroid Digital Microscope Camera mounted on an Olympus BX40 microscope.

Lung morphometry

Terminal saccular space areas were measured using NIH Image software (NIH, Bethesda, MD) as previously described [45]. Multiple measurements were performed on randomly selected 0.04-mm2 fields located in the distal part of the lung sections. The proportion of lung comprising terminal saccular spaces was calculated as a percentage of the total examined area of the lung section. Three animals per genotype were examined.

Assessment of cell proliferation/Division/death

Changes in cell proliferation and division were assessed by proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) IHC, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation and phosphorylated histone H3 (pHH3) IHC. The PCNA (1:2000) and pHH3-Ser28 (1:200) antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. For BrdU incorporation, timed pregnant mice at E18.5 were injected intra-peritoneally with 100 μg/gm body weight of BrdU (Sigma, St Louis, MO) 2 h prior to sacrifice, embryos dissected from uteri and processed as described above. Sections were stained with a monoclonal anti-BrdU antibody (1:100, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, IA) and visualized with a Cy2-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse antibody using a laser-scanning confocal microscope. Cell death was investigated by terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) using the Fluorescein In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) according to the manufacturer's protocol.

Western blotting

Sample preparation and western blotting was performed according to Kawakami et al with some minor modifications [35]. Briefly, 3 embryos from each genotype were pooled, homogenized in ice cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-pH8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF and 2 μg/ml each of aprotinin, leupeptin and pepstatin A) with a tissue homogenizer (PRO Scientific Inc., Oxford, CT) using three pulses of 10 seconds each and then subjected to Dounce homogenizer by 10 strokes. The homogenates were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 30 minutes at 4°C, supernatants collected, protein concentration determined and used for western blotting. COS1 cells were transfected using Superfect transfection reagent (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) with expression constructs encoding either the full-length Shh or the N-terminal fragment of Shh without post-translational modifications (constructs kindly provided by Dr. Pao-Tien Chuang, Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, CA), harvested 3 days after transfection and protein extracts prepared as described above. Protein concentration was determined using Bio-Rad protein assay kit (BioRad, Hercules, CA) and 20 μg (COS1 cells) and 75 μg (embryos) of lysates separated by 15 % SDS-PAGE, transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane, incubated with primary antibody (Shh-N19, 1:100) for 2 hours, followed by donkey anti-goat HRP second antibody (1:1000) and visualized by chemiluminescent detection according to manufacturer's protocols (Perkin-Elmer Life Sciences, Boston MA).

Northern blotting

Northern blotting was performed as previously described [46], using total RNA (20 μg) from P0 mice lungs. The cDNA probes for SP-A, SP-B and SP-C were kindly provided by Dr. Jeffery Whitsett (Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio). A cDNA probe for SP-D was amplified by RT-PCR, using murine SP-D cDNA specific primers (sense 5'-TGCCTGGTCGTGATGGACG-3', and antisense 5'-AGCACTGTCTGGAAGCCCGC-3') and confirmed by sequencing.

Author's contributions

HY designed the experiments. HY, ALP and JLC performed experiments.

GST analyzed tissue sterols by GC-MS and JO performed lung morphometric analyses. HY, AW and SBP analyzed the data. HY and SBP prepared the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Jeffery Whitsett for providing cDNA probes for SP-A, SP-B and SP-C and Pao-Tien Chuang for the Shh and Shh-N plasmids. This research was supported by a Beginning Grant-in-Aid 0160349U from the American Heart Association, Mid-Atlantic Consortium (HY); NIH PO1 HL52813 and NIH PO1 HD39946 (AW) and NIH HL68660 (SBP).A mouse model of sitosterolemia: absence of Abcg8/sterolin-2 results in failure to secrete biliary cholesterol

Abstract

Background

Mutations in either of two genes comprising the STSL locus, ATP-binding cassette (ABC)-transporters ABCG5 (encoding sterolin-1) and ABCG8 (encoding sterolin-2), result in sitosterolemia, a rare autosomal recessive disorder of sterol trafficking characterized by increased plasma plant sterol levels. Based upon the genetics of sitosterolemia, ABCG5/sterolin-1 and ABCG8/sterolin-2 are hypothesized to function as obligate heterodimers. No phenotypic difference has yet been described in humans with complete defects in either ABCG5 or ABCG8. These proteins, based upon the defects in humans, are responsible for regulating dietary sterol entry and biliary sterol secretion.

Methods

In order to mimic the human disease, we created, by a targeted disruption, a mouse model of sitosterolemia resulting in Abcg8/sterolin-2 deficiency alone. Homozygous knockout mice are viable and exhibit sitosterolemia.

Results

Mice deficient in Abcg8 have significantly increased plasma and tissue plant sterol levels (sitosterol and campesterol) consistent with sitosterolemia. Interestingly, Abcg5/sterolin-1 was expressed in both liver and intestine in Abcg8/sterolin-2 deficient mice and continued to show an apical expression. Remarkably, Abcg8 deficient mice had an impaired ability to secrete cholesterol into bile, but still maintained the ability to secrete sitosterol. We also report an intermediate phenotype in the heterozygous Abcg8+/- mice that are not sitosterolemic, but have a decreased level of biliary sterol secretion relative to wild-type mice.

Conclusion

These data indicate that Abcg8/sterolin-2 is necessary for biliary sterol secretion and that loss of Abcg8/sterolin-2 has a more profound effect upon biliary cholesterol secretion than sitosterol. Since biliary sitosterol secretion is preserved, although not elevated in the sitosterolemic mice, this observation suggests that mechanisms other than by Abcg8/sterolin-2 may be responsible for its secretion into bile.

Background

Absorption of dietary cholesterol from the intestine is an important part of cholesterol homeostasis and represents the initial step that allows dietary cholesterol to exert its metabolic effects. A typical western diet contains relatively equal amounts of cholesterol and non-cholesterol sterols, mainly plant sterols, of which about 55% of the dietary cholesterol is absorbed and retained compared to ~1% of the dietary non-cholesterol sterols [1-3]. Schoenheimer recognized more than 75 years ago that only cholesterol, not non-cholesterol sterols, is absorbed in the intestine, although the exact molecular mechanisms by which preferential cholesterol absorption occurs has not been fully elucidated [4]. Similarly, although the liver secretes free cholesterol into bile, it can preferentially excrete non-cholesterol sterols into bile and the mechanism(s) of this process has yet to be elucidated as well. Only recently, through the study of a rare human disease, have clues to this process been revealed.

Sitosterolemia (MIM 210250, also known as phytosterolemia) is a rare autosomal, recessively inherited disorder characterized by elevated blood and tissue plant sterol levels [5]. Affected individuals can develop tendon and/or tuberous xanthomas, hemolytic episodes, arthralgias, arthritis, and premature atherosclerosis [6,7]. Sitosterolemic patients have diagnostically elevated plasma plant sterol levels (for example, sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol, and avenosterol, etc.) and their 5-saturated stanol metabolites, particularly sitostanol, with normal or only moderately increased cholesterol levels. Clinical studies have shown that affected individuals hyperabsorb all dietary sterols (thus have lost the ability to restrict the sterol species absorbed) and have lost the ability to excrete sterols into bile [8,9]. Infusion of sitosterol and cholesterol into normal individuals leads to a rapid and preferential excretion of sitosterol into bile, but in sitosterolemic individuals biliary sterol secretion is almost absent [7,9]. Previous studies on sitosterolemia have suggested a defect involving a putative sterol 'transporter' expressed in the intestinal brush border and/or the hepatic canalicular membrane [10,11]. Genetic analyses of sitosterolemia pedigrees allowed the mapping of the STSL locus to human chromosome 2p21, between D2S2294 and D2S2298 [12,13]. By using positional cloning procedures or by screening for genes induced by exposure to LXR agonists, two groups identified not one but two genes, ABCG5 and ABCG8, which encode the proteins sterolin-1 and sterolin-2, mutations of which cause sitosterolemia [14-16]. Interestingly, complete mutation in either ABCG5 alone or ABCG8 alone is not only necessary, but sufficient to cause the disease [14]. To date, no patient with sitosterolemia has been identified with mutations in both genes. Based upon these data, and the similarity of the clinical and biochemical phenotype, sterolin-1 and sterolin-2 are hypothesized to function as obligate heterodimers. This is also supported by the fact that each of these proteins is a 'half-transporter', containing six transmembrane domains, and not the classical 12 transmembrane characteristic of functional ABC transporters. The exact function of these two proteins still remains unknown but recent studies have shown that overexpression of ABCG5/ABCG8 in a transgenic mouse model results in an increased biliary cholesterol concentration and a 50% reduction in the fractional absorption of dietary cholesterol [17]. It has been suggested that ABCG5 and ABCG8 act as mutual chaperones for both maturation and correct apical targeting. Co-expression of both was required for apical trafficking in a polarized cell line, as well in vivo using Abcg5/Abcg8 double-knockout mice [18,19]. However, no functional assay has yet been developed to demonstrate whether or not the two half-transporters function as homo- or heterodimers and whether they selectively pump sterols. Likewise, the cellular localization of these two proteins has yet to be shown in a model deficient in either Abcg5 or Abcg8 alone. A mouse model disrupting both Abcg5 and Abcg8 simultaneously results in a phenotype similar to that of the human disease [20]. However, it is important to point out that the human disease is caused by complete mutation in one or the other gene, but not both simultaneously.

We hypothesized that disruption of only one of the half-transporters would result in sitosterolemia and selective loss of either sterolin may show a differential effect on the biliary secretion of sterols or intestinal absorption of sterols. These studies are difficult to test in humans, as the target organs are relatively inaccessible. In order to test this hypothesis, we report a mouse model that has a selective genetic mutation of Abcg8. Mice homozygous for Abcg8 loss exhibit many of the characteristics of the human disease sitosterolemia. In addition, we report studies of biliary sterol secretion that show that despite forced secretion, Abcg8-deficient animals cannot secrete cholesterol into bile, although sitosterol secretion seemed unaffected.

Methods

Targeting vector construction and generation of knockout mice

A mouse genomic bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) library (CitbCJ7, ES cell line/129Sv, Research Genetics, Inc., Huntsville, AL, USA) was screened by using primers designed from the sequences of mouse Abcg5 and Abcg8 cDNA as previously reported [21]. A positive BAC clone was used as a template to amplify genomic DNA fragments of Abcg8. Long-fragment polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed using Expanded Long Template PCR system kit (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IA, USA). An approximately 4.5 kb 'long-arm' genomic fragment containing partial exon 1 to partial exon 3 was inserted into the Pml I restriction-cloning site A of OSDUPDEL vector. The 'short-arm' genomic fragment, containing partial exon 4 to partial exon 6, was cloned into the Not I-Kpn I of cloning site B. Homologous targeting would result in complete intron 3, partial exon 3 and partial exon 4 replacement by the neomycin-resistance cassette, resulting in the disruption of the ABC Walker A motif (Figure 1a).

ES cells (129/SvEvTac-cell line) were electroporated with the linearized targeting vector DNA and cultured on sub-confluent embryonic fibroblasts. Transfected cell colonies were selected by culturing cells in medium containing 200 μg/mL G418 (Life Technologies, Rockville, MD, USA). The ES cells were screened for homologous recombination by PCR with the forward primer, neoF (5'-GGGTCGTTTGTTCGGATCAA-3') from neo cassette, and reverse primer intron 6R (5'-ACCAGTTGGTCCTAGCTCGA-3'), which is located outside the targeting construct in mouse Abcg8 intron 6. Positively targeted ES cell clones were confirmed by Southern blotting, using ES cell DNA digested by BamHI and a probe comprising of a 562 bp PCR fragment from partial intron 2 and exon 3 of Abcg8 gene.

Positively targeted ES cells were microinjected into C57BL6 blastocysts and transplanted into pseudopregnant recipients. Five highly chimeric mice (agouti coat color, three males and two females) were isolated and bred with C57BL/6J mice to generate germ-line transmission heterozygous mice of Abcg8 gene disruption. Heterozygous offspring mice were back-crossed to C57BL/6J mice (n > 5) to produce disrupted line and inter-crossed to generate knockout mice.

Animals and diets

All mice were maintained on a standard rodent chow (Harlan Teklad mouse/rat diet LM-485) which contained 61 mg/kg cholesterol, 31 mg/kg campesterol, and 105 mg/kg sitosterol, given free access to water and maintained at 25°C with a 12-h light, 12-h dark cycle. All animals were housed in the facilities for laboratory animals provided by the Division of Laboratory Animal Resources ACLAM. The Institutional Animal Care and Research Advisory Committee at Medical University of South Carolina approved all experiments.

Genotyping by PCR

Mouse tail DNA was isolated and purified by cutting approximately 0.5 cm of mouse tail and digesting it in 500 μl lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH8.0, 100 mM EDTA, 125 mM NaCl, 1% SDS, 200 μg Proteinase K) with rocking overnight at 55°C. 200 μl saturated NaCl was added into digested solution with vigorous shaking for at least 60 seconds. Mixed solution was spun down at maximum speed in top micro-centrifuge for 20 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube with equal volume 100% EtOH and mixed by inversion. The DNA pellet was washed in 70% EtOH and resuspended in 100–150 μl TE buffer. UV spectrophotometry and electrophoresis were used to analyze the quality and quantity of the genomic DNA. Genotyping was performed by multiplex PCR reaction using three separate primers (two Abcg8 gene specific primers, mg8-in3F 5'-CCCAATGATGAATGAGACGCT-3', mg8-R9 5'-TTTGTCACGCTGGGCCTGG-3' and neoF for identification of Abcg8 target status). The PCR reaction consisted of 1x PCR buffer (1.5 mM MgCl2, 16 mM (NH4)2SO4, 0.1 mM dNTPs, 67 mM Tris-HCl (pH8.8)) 1 μM of each primer, water and 1.0 units of Taq polymerase. The reactions were cycled as follows: 94°C for 30 sec, 60°C for 30 sec, 72°C for 1 min for 35 cycles. The PCR products were identified by electrophoresis.

Southern blot analysis

To confirm PCR results, DNAs were digested with Bam HI, subjected to electrophoresis in a 0.6% agarose gel and transferred to nylon membrane. Southern blot filters were hybridized with a 562 bp PCR fragment from partial intron 2 and exon 3 of Abcg8 32P-randomly-labeled probe as previously described [22].

Northern blot analysis

Isolation of liver and intestinal total RNA from Abcg8+/+, Abcg8+/- and Abcg8-/- mice and Northern blot analyses were performed as previously described [23]. The probe for Abcg5 was 1964 bp (nt 136–2099, GeneBank™ accession no. AH011511) and the probe for Abcg8 was 2019 bp (nt 103–2126, GeneBank™ accession no. AH011518).

Reverse Transcription (RT)-PCR

To confirm that there was no alternative splicing of the disrupted allele, RT-PCR was performed on cDNAs of pooled mouse liver. Briefly, samples of total RNA (0.5 μg) from pooled mouse livers (n = 4) were reverse transcribed according to the SuperScript™ First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) using random hexamers in a final total reaction volume of 20 μl. RT-PCR was performed using primers located outside of the targeted region: F1 (CCTCAGCTGGTGAGGAGGTG) with R1 (GATGGAGAAGGTGAAGTTGCC), F2 (ATTTCCAATGACTTCCGGGAC) with R1 and F3 (CTGGAAGACGGGCTGTACACT) with R1, to produce expected product lengths of 1449, 654 and 429 bp respectively in wild-type cDNA.

Quantitative RT-PCR

Primers were based upon previously published primer sets [24-26] or designed using MacVector, which were designed from either mRNA or cDNA to avoid the amplification of potentially contaminating genomic DNA in the total RNA sample (Table 1). Samples of total RNA (0.5 μg) from pooled mouse livers (n = 4) were reverse transcribed according to the SuperScript™ First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) using random hexamers with a final total reaction volume of 20 μl. Quantitative RT-PCR was performed on a PE Biosystems GeneAmp® 5700 sequence Detection System (Forest City, CA, USA). Standard reaction volume was 10 μl containing 1 × QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR master mix (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), 0.002 U AmpErase UNG enzyme (PE Biosystems, Forest City, CA, USA), 0.7 μl of cDNA template from reverse transcription reaction as above and 100–500 nM of oligonucleotide primers. Initial steps of RT-PCR were two minutes at 50°C for UNG activation, followed by a 15 minute hold at 95°C. Cycles (n = 40) consisted of a 15 second melt at 95°C, followed by a 1 minute annealing/extension at 60°C. The final step was a 60°C incubation for 1 minute. At the end of the run, samples were heated to 95°C with a ramp time of 20 minutes to construct dissociation curves to ensure that single PCR products were obtained. All reactions were performed in triplicate. Threshold cycle (CT) analysis of all samples was set at 0.5 relative fluorescence units. The relative quantities of message of genes of interest from the mouse liver samples used in real-time RT-PCR were normalized to cyclophilin to compensate for variations in input RNA amounts. The data were analyzed using the comparative threshold cycle method (CT). Briefly, the CT values are averaged, from the triplicates defining a Δ-CT value calculated by taking the average CT of the gene of interest and subtracting it from the average CT of cyclophilin. The ΔΔ-CT was calculated by subtracting the average Δ-CT(calibrator) values from the Δ-CT(sample). The relative quantification was then calculated by the expression 2-AverageΔΔ-CT. The mRNA quantity for the calibrator (wild type) was expressed as 1 and all other quantities were expressed as a fold difference relative to the calibrator (wild type).

Plasma lipid analysis by fast protein liquid chromatography

Following 16 hrs of fasting, blood samples (n = 3) from each of the Abcg8+/+, Abcg8+/- and Abcg8-/- mice were collected from the retro-orbital venous plexus using heparinized capillary tubes under isoflurane anesthesia, and placed into precooled tubes containing 10 μl of 0.5 M EDTA. Equal volumes of plasma from each genotype were pooled and 100 μL of the pooled sample were injected and fractionated by fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC) using a Superose 6 HR10/30 column (Pharmacia Biotech Inc., Piscataway, NJ, USA) and analyzed as described [27].

Sterol composition of plasma and tissues

Following a four-hour fast of 12-week-old mice fed on regular rodent chow diet; blood and tissues were collected under isofluorane anesthesia from each of the Abcg8+/+, Abcg8+/- and Abcg8-/- mice (n = 3 for each group). Blood was collected from the retro-orbital venous plexus by heparinized glass tube. The animals were sacrificed by cervical dislocation for tissue collection. Plasma (100 μl) was saponified in 1 N NaOH for one hour, 1.5 mL water added and sterols extracted with three sequential portions of 1.5 mL ethyl acetate, containing 70 μg 5α-cholestane as an internal standard, pooled and dried. Mouse tissues (liver, spleen and brain) were weighed, homogenized in 1 mL phosphate buffer saline (PBS) with a dounce homogenizer (15 strokes at 500 rpm) and a small aliquot of the whole homogenate assayed for protein concentration. Aliquots for sterol analysis from whole tissue homogenates were extracted as described above. Dried sterol samples were derivatized as trimethylsilylethers, redissolved in 10 μL hexane and 2 μL samples were injected into a capillary column (26 m length, 0.32 mm ID, 0.45 mm OD) coated with liquid CpWAX 57 CB (Chrompak, Bridgewater, NJ, USA) in a Hewlett-Packard Gas Chromatograph equipped with a flame ionization detector [28]. Concentrations of plasma and tissue sterols were reported as mg/dL and μg/g wet weight tissue, respectively.

Polyclonal antibody production

Three separate polyclonal anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibodies have been raised as previously described [20,29,30]. In experiments, anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibodies are labelled as follows:

1) SC – from the Patel group, 2) AMC – from the AMC Liver Center group, and 3) UTSW – from the Hobbs group.

Membrane protein preparations

Total membranes were prepared by taking approximately 500 mg of liver tissue cut into small pieces and homogenized in ice cold lysis buffer (5 mM Tris-pH7.5, 250 mM sucrose with protease inhibitors) by a dounce homogenizer times 10 strokes. Samples were then subjected to centrifugation – 1300 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The supernant was saved and the pellet was resuspended and again subjected to dounce homogenization times 10 strokes then centrifuged 1000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. This step was repeated twice each time with the supernant being collected and kept on ice. The supernants were then pooled and subjected to ultracentrifugation at 100,000 g for 60 minutes at 4°C. The supernant was removed and the pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer. Plasma membranes were prepared as previously described [31]. Protein sample concentrations were then determined by Bio-Rad protein colormetric assay per manufacturer's protocol (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). 50 μg of membrane proteins were then resolved on 7.5% SDS acrylamide gel.

Immunoblotting

Proteins resolved by SDS-PAGE were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were then blocked for one hour in 5% dry milk in PBS-T (Phosphate Buffered saline and 0.1% Tween 20). Blots were then probed with primary antibody against Abcg5 in 5% milk in PBS-T overnight at 4°C. The blot was then washed three times for five minutes in TBS-T (Tris Buffered Saline/0.1% Tween-20) with 150 mM NaCl, and secondarily stained with goat-anti-rabbit conjugated HRP 1:10,000 dilution in 5% milk in PBS-T for one hour. The blot was again washed three times for five minutes in TBS-T with 150 mM NaCl then covered in Western Lightning® Chemiluminescence Reagent Plus (PerkinElmer Life Sciences, Inc. Boston, MA, USA), wrapped in plastic, exposed to film and developed.

Immunohistochemical analysis

Snap-frozen liver and intestine tissue were cut to produce 8 μm thick frozen sections, air-dried for 30 minutes onto glass slides and stored at -80°C until required. The slides were stained with hematoxylin, rinsed three times with PBS, fixed for 10 min with cooled methanol at -20°C and then rinsed three times with PBS. Slides for antibody staining were initially blocked in PBS/0.1 M glycine/10% goat serum for 60 min at room temperature then incubated with anti-sterolin-1 antibody (1:15 dilution) overnight at 4°C. The slides were washed with 1 × PBS and incubated with secondary antibody (goat-anti-rabbit IgG conjugated with rhodamine, 1:1000 dilution) for 30 min at room temperature, washed and then observed under an Olympus BX-5 confocal microscope with Fluoview. The sections stained at the AMC Liver Center were fixed in 100% acetone for 30 min at room temperature, blocked in a solution of PBS/0.05% Tween-20/5% goat serum (GS) for one hour, then incubated with Anti-sterolin-1 (1:40 dilution) and anti-Bsep (1:200 dilution) diluted in PBS/Tween/GS, for one hour. Thereafter, slides were washed 3 × 10 min in PBS/Tween and the secondary antibody (goat-anti-rabbit Alexa 488) was applied in 1:1000 dilution in PBST/GS for one hour at room temperature. After washing for 3 × 10 min the sections were mounted in Dapi/Dapco solution. Fluorescence microscopy was done with a Leica DM RA2 microscope equipped with a Leica DC350F photo camera. For Dapi staining, 359 nm (30.38 ms exposure) was used and for Abcg5 and Bsep staining, 514 nm (for both: 1654.34 ms exposure) was used and the pictures were analyzed and overlaid using FW4000 software (Leica).

Transfection and immunostaining of COS-1 cells

COS-1 cells were transiently transfected with pCMV-mouse Abcg5 and pCMV-mouse Abcg8 expression constructs using the Qiagen SuperFect reagent per protocol (Valencia, CA, USA). Briefly, COS-1 cells were seeded onto a six-well plate the day prior to transfection to generate 60% confluence when grown at 37°C and 5% CO2 in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin and 1 × glutamine. On the day of transfection, 2 μg of DNA was mixed with Qiagen SuperFect reagent and incubated for 10 minutes. This mixture was then added to serum-free media and placed on the cells to incubate for two hours. The cells were washed once with 1x PBS and fresh media was added. The transfected cells were then incubated for 48 hours to ensure expression and subsequently fixed with a 1:1 mixture of acetone:methanol. In preparation for immunostaining, cells were blocked with 2% goat serum in PBS for 30 minutes, then incubated with 1:50 dilution of primary antibody anti-Abcg5 in 2% goat serum-PBS for 1.5 hours, and subsequently incubated with secondary rhodamine anti-rabbit IgG antibody for 30 minutes. Cells were then observed under an Olympus BX-5 confocal microscope with Fluoview.

Dynamic biliary lipid collection and analysis

Mice were anaesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of 1 mL/kg fentanyl/fluanisone and 10 mg/kg Diazepam. The abdomen was opened and, after distal ligation of the bile duct, the gallbladder was cannulated. Bile sampling started directly after cannulation and was collected for 10 min. Bile flow was determined gravimetrically. Biliary bile salt, sterol and phospholipid concentrations were determined as described previously [32]. To determine maximal secretion rates of biliary lipid secretion, bile was diverted for 90 min to deplete the endogenous bile salt pool. Subsequently, tauroursodeoxycholate (Sigma Chemical Co., MO, USA) dissolved in PBS was infused into the jugular vein in stepwise increasing rates from 600–1,800 nmol/min/100 g body weight. Bile was collected in 10 min fractions and analyzed for bile salt and lipid content. In separate experiments, following distal ligation of the bile duct and cannulation of gallbladder, bile was diverted for 30 minutes while mice were infused with sterile PBS. Subsequently, the mice were infused continuously with 1,200 nmol/min/100 g body weight of tauroursodeoxycholate and two 30-minute fractions were collected. Sterol analyses of bile was performed by GC analysis as described above.

Assay of HMG-CoA and cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase enzyme activity

Mouse liver microsomes were prepared by differential centrifugation [33]. Briefly, 0.1–0.2 g liver was homogenized in a Potter-Elvjhem homogenizer with five volumes of buffer (0.25 M sucrose, 0.1 M Tris, 0.1 mM disodium EDTA, 0.1 mM DTT, pH 7.4). Microsomes were isolated by differential centrifugation (10,000 g to 100,000 g). The pellets were washed and resuspended in storage buffer (0.1 M dipotassium phosphate, 0.05 M KCl, 1 mM DTT, 5 mM disodium EDTA, 20% glycerol, pH 7.4) at 25–30 mg protein/ml. Protein concentrations were determined according to the method of Lowry et al. [34]. The activity of cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase (EC 1.14.12.17) was measured by an isotope incorporation method according to Shefer et al. [33] with some modifications. The reaction mixture (final volume 0.5 ml) consisted of potassium phosphate buffer (100 mM K2HPO4, 0.1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 30 mM nicotinamide, pH 7.4), [14C]-cholesterol (5 × 105 dpm) solubilized in 50 μl of 25% (wt/vol) β-cyclodextrin (final concentration 0.8%), and 50–200 μg of microsomal protein. The reaction was initiated by the addition of NADPH or an NADPH-generating system (3.4 mM NADP+, 30 mM glucose-6-phosphate, 0.3 U of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase) and continued for 15 min at 37°C. The reaction was stopped with 0.5 ml of 1 N KOH, 5 μg of butylated hydroxytoluene, and 10 μl of ethanolic potassium hydroxide. [3H] 7α-hydroxycholesterol (1 × 104 dpm/5 μg) was added as an internal recovery standard. After saponification at 37°C for one hour, sterols were extracted twice with 3 ml of n-hexane and the extracts were evaporated to dryness under nitrogen. The residue was dissolved in 0.3 ml of n-hexane:2-propanol (97.3 vol/vol) and applied to a silica column (500 mg; sep-pak, by 4 ml of n-hexane:2-propanol (97.3 vol/vol)). 7α-hydroxycholesterol was eluted with 3 ml of n-hexane:2-propanol (80:20 vol:vol) and further isolated by TLC on silica gel plates (Silica gel 60, EM Science, Gibbestown, NJ, USA) with diethyl ether, and quantified by liquid scintillation counting using Ecolume (ICN Radiochemicals Irvine, CA, USA). Assays were carried out in duplicate with correction for zero-time controls. HMG-CoA reductase (EC 1.1.1.3.4) activity was determined according to the method of Xu et al. [35] with modifications as described [36].

Statistical analysis

Data are shown as means ± SD. The Student's t test was used to determine the statistical significance of differences between the groups of animals. Significance was set at P values <0.05.

Results

Isolation of Abcg8/sterolin-2 deficient mice

The targeting construct (Figure 1a) results in the potential disruption of normal splicing, as well as loss of some coding sequences involving exons 3 and 4. After ES cell electroporation with the linearized targeted plasmid DNA, two homologous recombinant ES clones (out of 58 ES clones screened) were identified. Blastocyst injection of these resulted in five highly chimeric mice (three males, two females). One male and one female, both from the same ES clone, showed germline transmission and the female line was used to establish a multi-generational colony bred onto a C57Bl/6J background.

Heterozygous mice were fertile and gave rise to normal litter sizes. Breeding heterozygous animals led to wild-type, heterozygous and homozygous knockout mice in the expected Mendelian distribution (data not shown). Although not quantitative, Northern analyses showed that while the knockout mice showed no detectable mRNA for Abcg8, expression of Abcg5 appeared unaltered (Figure 1c). To exclude the possibility of alternative splicing with the production of a non-functional but truncated Abcg8/sterolin-2 protein that may serve as a chaperone for Abcg5/sterolin-1, RT-PCR was performed on cDNA reverse transcribed from total liver RNA from Abcg8-deficient mice. No mRNA for Abcg8/sterolin-2 was detected containing any sequences downstream of exon 4 in the Abcg8-deficient mice, whether primers were located in exons 4 and 13, exons 9 and 13 or exons 10 and 13 (Figure 1d,1e). This demonstrates that if an alternatively spliced message could potentially code for a truncated protein, it is not detectable in the Abcg8-deficient mice. The membrane-spanning domains of Abcg8/sterolin-2 are encoded by exons 9–13.

Sterol levels in Abcg8/sterolin-2 deficient animals

Elevated plant sterols in tissue and plasma are diagnostic of sitosterolemia. Sterol levels, as determined by gas chromatography (GC) analysis, in plasma and tissues of the Abcg8-/- mice are shown in Table 2. There were no differences in tissue weights between wild types, heterozygotes and knockouts. Plasma cholesterol levels of the homozygous and heterozygous mice were decreased by 52% and 26%, respectively, compared to those of wild-type mice (n = 3 all groups, Table 2). Plant sterols were almost undetectable in wild-type and heterozygous mice, but were significantly elevated in Abcg8-/- mice. Plasma campesterol and sitosterol levels were eight- and 36-fold higher in Abcg8-/- mice compared to wild-type mice (8.76 ± 2.10 and 18.52 ± 5.03 mg/dL, respectively, versus 1.14 ± 0.69 and 0.50 ± 0.55 mg/dL). There was no significant difference in the plasma plant sterol levels between heterozygous and wild-type mice. Liver cholesterol content of the Abcg8-/- mice was reduced by ~50% relative to wild-type liver (1202 ± 264 μg/g wet weight tissue, versus 2280 ± 310 μg/g wet weight tissue, respectively). The reduced cholesterol content was offset by a five-fold increase in campesterol and a 22-fold increase in sitosterol (233.9 ± 48.1 and 376.3 ± 96.1 μg/g wet weight tissue, respectively) in Abcg8-/- knockout mice compared to wild-type mice (52.2 ± 15.0 and 16.7 ± 8.6 μg/g wet weight tissue, respectively, Table 2). There were no significant differences of liver cholesterol or plant sterol contents between Abcg8+/+ and Abcg8+/- mice. Spleen sterol contents reflected the liver profiles (Table 2). No significant differences in brain sterol contents were observed, as would be expected, since the blood brain barrier is intact and prevents entry of these sterols in sitosterolemia (Table 2). There were only traces of plant sterols in the brains from knockout animals, reflecting blood contamination during tissue harvesting.

Interestingly, the majority of the elevated tissue plant sterols are unesterified. The livers of Abcg8+/+, +/- and -/- mice have relatively similar levels of esterified cholesterol (Figure 2a). However, there is little if any esterification of sitosterol or campesterol (Figure 2b,2c) consistent with previous findings [37,38]. Thus all of the expansion of tissue sterol pools are as free sterols.

FPLC analyses for sterols (measured enzymatically and thus reflecting total sterols) and triglycerides were performed on plasma samples from fasted animals fed a regular chow diet. No significant differences were observed for the sterol profiles (Figure 3a), but surprisingly, the Abcg8-/- knockout mice had a significantly higher triglyceride level in the LDL lipoprotein fractions compared to wild-type and heterozygous mice (Figure 3b). The size of this peak was variable between different littermate analyses, but is always increased in the knockout animals. Total plasma triglyceride levels of the Abcg8-/- mice were slightly higher (79.2 ± 14 mg/dL compared to the wild type 63.4 ± 13 mg/dL and heterozygotes 46.6 ± 12 mg/dL, n = 3 for all genotypes). Preliminary analyses of proteins in the isolated FPLC fractions did not show any qualitative changes in apolipoproteins B, E, AI, or AII. The significance of this triglyceride rich peak remains unclear at present.

Liver gene expression and enzyme activity change in Abcg8/sterolin-2 deficient mice

To investigate the effects of a deficiency of Abcg8/sterolin-2 on the genes that regulate sterol metabolism, quantitative RT-PCR was performed looking at the expression levels of Abcg5, Abcg8, Hmgr, Cyp7a1, Abca1, Mdr2, Lxr, Srebp-1c, and Srebp-2 mRNA in the livers of mice fed a regular chow diet (Figure 4a). As expected, Abcg8 mRNA expression levels were undetectable in the Abcg8-/- mice and were reduced by ~50% in the heterozygous mice, relative to wild-type mice. Interestingly, by quantitative RT-PCR, the mRNA expression of Abcg5 in the knock-out mice was also reduced by more than 60% compared to the wild-type mice, although no changes were noted in the heterozygous mice. Expression of HMG-CoA reductase mRNA was decreased by ~50% and ~80% in the heterozygote and knockout mice respectively, in keeping with limited observations in human patients with this disorder [7].

To verify whether the mRNA changes resulted in alteration of the enzyme activity changes, liver samples were analyzed for HMG-CoA reductase activity and Cyp7a1 activity (Figure 4b). HMG-CoA reductase activity was reduced by 30% and 60% in the Abcg8+/- and Abcg8-/- mice, respectively (Figure 4b), and thus reflected the changes in mRNA expression. In contrast, although the Cyp7a1 mRNA expression levels were essentially unchanged in the knockout mouse, Cyp7a1 activity was significantly decreased by 37% (P < 0.01). In the heterozygous mice, both the mRNA and activity of Cyp7a1 were decreased. Sitosterol is known to be a direct competitive inhibitor of Cyp7a1 and it is likely that the elevated plant sterols in the liver are responsible for the inhibition in the knockout mouse [39].

Localization of Abcg5 protein in Abcg8-/- knockout mice

Does the loss of Abcg8/sterolin-2 result in loss of Abcg5/sterolin-1 expression, as might be predicted from the genetic studies and more recently from the in vitro and in vivo expression studies? A robust antibody to mouse Abcg8/sterolin-2 is not currently available. However, three separate groups have developed rabbit polyclonal antibody to mouse Abcg5/sterolin-1. These three antibodies were used in Western blotting and immunohistochemistry experiments on the liver and intestine of Abcg8-/- mice. Western blotting of liver total membrane preparations using the three separately-developed anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibodies showed different results. As has been previously published, Abcg5/sterolin-1 exists in two separate forms, the 'immature' 75 kDa protein and a fully glycosylated 'mature' 93 kDa protein [18,30]. Using the SC anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 peptide antibody, a 75 kDa band is detected (Figure 5a). This antibody does not detect a 'mature' 93 kDa band in either wild-type or knockout animals nor is the 75 kDa band sensitive to either Endo-H or PNGaseF (lower panel shows same aliquots probed with anti-transferrin). The AMC antibody detects the 'mature' form of Abcg5/sterolin-1 in wild-type animals but not the knockouts. Interestingly, the 'immature' 75 kDa band is detected by this antibody but the band shifts with Endo-H and PNGase F treatment (Figure 5b). The UTSW antibody detects the 'mature' and 'immature' forms of Abcg5/sterolin-1 in wild-type animals but detects no forms in the knockout mouse (Figure 5c). What does hold true for all antibodies used against Abcg5/sterolin-1 is the detection of a 75 kDa band.

Immunohistochemistry experiments were carried out using all three antibodies. In acute transfection studies, the SC antibody recognized over-expressed mouse Abcg5/sterolin-1 in COS-1 cells, but not mouse Abcg8/sterolin-2 (Figure 6b,6c). Co-transfection of COS-1 cells with both Abcg5 and Abcg8 cDNAs did not alter the pattern of immunofluorescence, although we are not able to confirm simultaneous expression of Abcg8 in cells expressing Abcg5/sterolin-1, as we have no suitable antibody for Abcg8/sterolin-2 (Figure 6d). Nevertheless, this experiment indicates that the SC antibody can recognize Abcg5/sterolin-1 but does not cross-react with Abcg8/sterolin-2.

Serial sections of intestinal tissue were incubated with anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 to determine the cellular location of Abcg5/sterolin-1. The pattern of staining of Abcg5/sterolin-1 in the intestinal sections is clearly apical and localized to the villi of the enterocytes (Figure 6g,6h,6i). Loss of Abcg8/sterolin-2 does not seem to affect this pattern of staining. To further confirm that the antibody used recognizes Abcg5/sterolin-1; this pattern is blocked if the antibody is pre-incubated with the peptide to which it was raised (Figure 6f). To further confirm that Abcg5/sterolin-1 expression is preserved and may be apical, immunohistochemistry was performed in Amsterdam using the AMC antibody to stain liver sections from wild-type and knockout mice [30]. As a control, the expression of Abcb11, an ABC transporter known to be responsible for the export of bile salts, was compared to that of Abcg5/sterolin-1 (Figure 6j,6k). Again, both proteins are apically localized in liver sections from wild-type mice and this pattern is essentially unperturbed in liver from knockout mice, although the expression level of Abcg5/sterolin-1 seems to be less robust qualitatively (Figure 6l,6m). To further confirm the apical expression of Abcg5/sterolin-1 in the knockout mice, the UTSW antibody was used to stain liver sections of wild-type and knockout mice. Again, there is apical expression of Abcg5/sterolin-1 in both wild-type and knockout livers (Figure 7a,7b).

Biliary secretion of bile salts, sterol and phospholipids in Abcg8/sterolin-2 deficient mice

Sitosterolemic individuals have an impaired ability to secrete cholesterol and plant sterols into bile [40,41]. We analyzed the knockout mice for any alterations in biliary sterol handling. Analyses of the initial basal bile secretion showed that the sterol and phospholipid contents in Abcg8-/- mice were reduced as compared to wild-type mice, (Figure 8a,8b,8c, bile salt secretion not statistically significant, for sterol secretion P = 0.01 and for phospholipid secretion P = 0.03).

To investigate whether the defect in biliary sterol secretion could be (partly) restored by forced biliary sterol secretion, we infused mice with stepwise increasing doses of tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDC). Mice were first depleted of their endogenous bile salt pools for 90 min and subsequently infused via the jugular vein with increasing doses of TUDC. As shown in Figure 8d, bile salt secretion was no different between the different genotypes during the depletion or the TUDC infusion phases of the experiment. However, a different pattern emerged for the secretion of phospholipid (Figure 8f). There was no difference between wild-type and heterozygous mice, but knockout mice showed a trend of lower phospholipid secretion during both the depletion and infusion phase. Even more dramatic was the effect on biliary sterol secretion although the sterol contents were determined enzymatically and no distinction is made as to whether this is sitosterol or cholesterol (Figure 8e, but see below). In the knockout mice, almost no stimulated sterol secretion was noted, with an intermediate phenotype in the heterozygous mice. In the heterozygous mice, sterol secretion increased to reach a maximal level of about 50% of the wild type suggesting that Abcg8/sterolin-2 is a rate-limiting step for biliary 'cholesterol' secretion. In the knockout mice, sterol secretion remained at a constant level during the depletion phase and increased minimally upon infusion of TUDC.

Since the Abcg8-/- mice still secreted some sterols we were interested in which biliary sterol species were being secreted. Therefore bile was collected from mice during a constant infusion of TUDC and analyzed by GC. Mice were first depleted of their endogenous bile acid pools for 30 minutes then infused with a continuous dose of TUDC (1,200 nmol/min/100 g body weight). The knockout mice showed a significantly diminished ability to secrete cholesterol, yet still maintained the ability to secrete sitosterol and campesterol compared to wild-type mice (Figure 9). Surprisingly, the Abcg8+/- mice tended to show an increased ability to secrete all sterols above the levels seen in the wild-type mice, although this was not statistically significant.

Discussion

The mechanism by which dietary cholesterol is specifically absorbed and dietary non-cholesterol sterols primarily excluded or the mechanism(s) by which the liver can selectively secrete sterols has not been elucidated. Identification of the genetic defect(s) in a rare human disorder, sitosterolemia, where these processes are specifically disrupted, may finally have led to the identification of the 'transporters' responsible for these processes. Complete defects in one of two genes (but not both), organized in a head-to-head configuration at the STSL locus, causes sitosterolemia. We report a mouse model of sitosterolemia, with a selective, but complete, defect in one of these genes, Abcg8. This mouse reflects the known defects described in human sitosterolemia [5,7,42]. Plasma and all tissues, apart from the brain, have significantly elevated sitosterol levels. Homozygous knockout mice are viable, fertile and sitosterolemic. However, fertility seems to be reduced when homozygous mice are bred together (S Patel and J Oatis, unpublished observation).

This model reflects many other observed changes described in limited studies in humans. For example, in humans, the activity of HMG-CoA reductase and CYP7a1 have been reported to be low [7,39]. In this study, we show that the mRNA and enzyme activities in the livers from knockout animals are also significantly reduced. Additionally, the activity of the rate-limiting enzyme for bile acid synthesis, CYP7a1, is reduced, although no changes at the mRNA level are noted. This is also in keeping with previous studies that show that sitosterol is a direct inhibitor of this enzyme in vitro [39].

Biliary sterols of Abcg8-deficient mice were dramatically different compared to wild-type mice. Measurement of biliary sterol secretion rates in Abcg8-/- mice demonstrated a failure to increase sterol secretion into bile despite exogenous infusion of bile acids. Furthermore, complete loss of Abcg8/sterolin-2 results in an inability to secrete cholesterol into bile, although secretion of sitosterol seemed to be preserved. Arguably, since the body pools and plasma sitosterol levels in the knockout mice are so considerably elevated, perhaps the biliary sitosterol levels could be considered to be inappropriately low. Despite this reservation, the finding that sitosterol is present in the bile suggests that plant sterols may be secreted independent of Abcg8/sterolin-2. The ability of Abcg8-/- mice to secrete bile salt and phospholipid into bile as compared to wild-type mice was not significantly impaired. Collectively these data suggest that Abcg8/sterolin-2 is necessary for hepatobiliary cholesterol secretion in mice.

Abcg8-/- mice appeared normal and healthy maintained on a regular rodent chow diet. Their phenotypic features are very similar to those recently reported for a mouse deficient in both sterolins simultaneously [7,20]. Plasma and hepatic plant sterol levels in Abcg8-/- and Abcg5/Abcg8 knockout are increased similarly with marked decreases in cholesterol levels. Interestingly, plasma triglyceride levels of the Abcg8-/- mice were slightly higher than wild-type animals and this increased triglyceride is carried in the LDL fraction range, as measured by FPLC. The significance of this is not clear, although preliminary SDS-PAGE analyses of all the fractions failed to reveal any differences between wild-type and knockout samples.

Hepatic levels of GC-measured cholesterol were greatly reduced in Abcg8-/- mice compared to wild-type mice, yet mRNA levels of HMG-CoA reductase and enzyme activity are also reduced without any significant change in mRNA of the Srebps. The basis for this is not clear at present, unless the increase in non-plant sterols leads to a suppression of SREBP activation. Sitosterol has been shown to directly inhibit Cyp7a1 activity in vitro and we presume this may account for the reduced enzyme activity [39]. In preliminary studies, when knockout mice are placed on a low sitosterol diet, the activity of this enzyme, as well as the mRNA levels are increased (E Klett and S Patel, unpublished observations). Another prediction, based upon the enzyme and mRNA levels in knockout mice, is that if these mice are placed on a high cholesterol/high sitosterol diet, they may show significant accumulation of both sterols in the body. This may also be relevant to the human disorder where some, although not all affected individuals, manifest premature coronary artery disease.

Abcg8/sterolin-2 deficient mice also allow us to examine the role of this protein in biliary sterol secretion. The bile is sterol poor and upon stimulation by increasing bile salt excretion, Abcg8/sterolin-2 deficient mice cannot respond, in contrast to the wild-type mice. Thus, Abcg8/sterolin-2 is necessary for cholesterol secretion but not necessary for plant sterol secretion. It could be argued that although the biliary sterol output is comparable to that seen in wild-type mice that this is inappropriately low, since the tissue and plasma pools of sitosterol are so elevated in the knockout mice. Despite this caveat, the findings of sitosterol in significant quantities in the bile suggests that mechanisms other than via the sterolins can 'export' some of these sterols. Interestingly, although humans who are heterozygous for genetic defects in either ABCG5 or ABCG8 seem to be phenotypically normal, mice heterozygous for Abcg8/sterolin-2 deficiency show that sterol secretion is impaired, but not absent. Note that under steady-state conditions on a rodent chow diet, heterozygous animals show no significant elevations in plasma or tissue sitosterol levels, suggesting that the activity of these proteins may not be rate limiting. Furthermore, the heterozygous Abcg8+/- mice showed higher levels of biliary sitosterol relative to the wild-type mice. While the rate of total biliary sterol secretion is reduced compared to wild-type mice, since the heterozygous mice are not sitosterolemic, either the activity of these proteins is not rate limiting or other mechanisms can compensate for a 50% loss of activity. On the other hand, since feeding is intermittent, a slow, but continuous secretion during post-prandial periods could easily negate any mild temporary increase in tissue and plasma plant sterol levels in heterozygous animals. This may be amenable to testing by placing these animals on a high plant sterol diet and measuring the plasma sterol levels.

Recently, Kosters et al. reported that Abcg5/Abcg8 mRNA expression in a variety of different mouse strains correlated with biliary cholesterol secretion rates [30]. In their studies, although diosgenin-fed mice showed a marked increase in biliary cholesterol output, mRNA levels of Abcg5 and Abcg8 were not altered. Using Western blot analyses, the protein level of Abcg5 was also not altered by diosgenin, although Abcg8 was not measured. They concluded that a parallel route for biliary cholesterol secretion might be operational, independent of the sterolins. While biliary cholesterol secretion is not completely absent in the Abcg8-deficient mice it would appear that sterolin-2 plays a major role in this process. In a genetic screen of plasma plant sterol levels, Sehayek et al. identified three loci that may be responsible for controlling plasma plant sterol levels and not one of these loci mapped to the murine STSL region [43]. Thus, there is support for at least four loci that may be involved in regulating plasma plant sterol levels. To date the STSL locus is the only one proven to be involved in dietary sterol trafficking and the identity of the others remains to be elucidated.

We, as well as others, have proposed Abcg5/sterolin-1 and Abcg8/sterolin-2 to function as obligate heterodimers. Thus knocking out Abcg8/sterolin-2 alone is equivalent to a functional loss of both sterolins. It has been shown that Abcg8/sterolin-2 expression is required for correct apical trafficking of Abcg5/sterolin-1 to the apical surface in a polarized cell line and more recently in vivo by over-expression experiments [18,19]. In experiments shown here, using three separately developed anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibodies, we have obtained inconsistent data regarding the trafficking of Abcg5/sterolin-1 in Abcg8-/- mice. Based upon classical N-glycosylation maturation it would appear that Abcg5/sterolin-1, in the Abcg8-/- mice, does not exit the endoplasmic reticulum. However, by immunohistochemistry it appears that Abcg5/sterolin-1 is apically expressed in the Abcg8-deficient mice regardless of the anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibody used. Interestingly, in a report of Abcg5/Abcg8 localization in canine gallbladder epithelial cells, these two proteins were found intracellularly under baseline conditions [44]. But when given liver X receptor alpha (LXRα) agonist, Abcg5/sterolin-1 and Abcg8/sterolin-2 appeared to be expressed at the apical surface. In these studies the UTSW anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibody was used. It is apparent with these conflicting data that the trafficking of these transporters is not as clear-cut. In a recent paper, Mangrivite et al. showed that the apical sorting of rat SPNT in polarized renal epithelial cells was independent of N-glycosylation [45]. Therefore, at this time, we can neither exclude the possibility that Abcg5/sterolin-1 expression is functional in our Abcg8/sterolin-2 deficient mice nor can we rule it out. We have no functional assay for these proteins at present. More extensive fractionation experiments are underway to better determine the exact compartmental location of Abcg5/sterolin-1 in the Abcg8-/- mice. In this context, Plösch et al. have described an Abcg5/sterolin-1 deficient mouse that maintains the ability to secrete biliary cholesterol to the same extent as the wild-type mice and, when fed a LXR agonist, had higher Abcg8 mRNA expression and tended to secrete more biliary cholesterol than wild-type mice [46]. It has been argued that Abcg5/sterolin-1 and Abcg8/sterolin-2 are dependent upon each other for secretion of hepatic sterols into bile [19]. Given the data presented here and from the Abcg5-deficient mouse this does not appear to be the case. Perhaps in the previously published model a non-physiologic state has been made that generates these data. Taken together, these animal models suggest that Abcg5/sterolin-1 and Abcg8/sterolin-2 have independent function in vivo or that there are proteins other than the sterolins that can secrete biliary sterols.

Conclusions

The major findings in this study are: (1) disruption of only one of the two genes comprising the STSL locus is necessary and sufficient to cause sitosterolemia, (2) that the loss of Abcg8/sterolin-2 leads to the loss of biliary cholesterol secretion and (3) Abcg5/sterolin-1 appears to be still apically-expressed despite the absence of Abcg8/sterolin-2. These data strongly support the direct role of Abcg8/sterolin-2 as a key player in biliary cholesterol secretion, although biliary sitosterol secretion was apparently preserved. These data suggest that there are mechanisms other than Abcg8/sterolin-2 that allow for the secretion of sitosterol into bile.

Competing interests

None declared.

Authors' contributions

ELK carried out molecular genetics studies, quantitative RT-PCR, and dynamic bile collection for Figure 9. KL carried out molecular genetic studies and made the targeting construct. The knockout mice were isolated in the NM laboratory. HY performed Northern blotting. ELK, AK, EV and MHL performed Western blotting and immunohistochemistry experiments. AK and NL performed bile collection experiments and bile characterization for Figure 8. MA performed FPLC analysis. SS, AK and RK performed GC sterol analyses. JC assisted with dynamic bile collection and mouse surgery. ROE, AG, NM, GS and SBP were responsible for supervision, data analyses of experiments and for providing funding of these experiments. ELK and SBP wrote the paper.

Pre-publication history

The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:



Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Dr B Stieger for kindly providing anti-Bsep antibody and Dr H Hobbs for providing the UTSW anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibody. We would also like to thank John Oatis, III for his excellent animal husbandry. Grants from the American Heart Association, Beginning Grant-In-Aid Mid-Atlantic Affiliate (KL), NIH Postdoctoral Training Grant T32 HL07260 (ELK), the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NOW) 902-23-193 (AK) as well as the National Institutes of Health Grant HL60613 (SBP) and DK56830 (GS) supported this work.

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Generation of mice deficient in Abcg8/sterolin-2. The targeted disruption strategy of Abcg8 is as shown (panel a). Southern blot analysis of BamHI digested mouse genomic DNA, probed with [32P]-randomly labelled probe resulting in a 6.0 kb band for wild type, a 2.7 kb band for homozygous and two bands of 5.9 and 2.6 kb for the heterozygote (panel b). Northern blot analysis of hepatic RNA showed a loss of Abcg8/sterolin-2 mRNA in the homozygote and decreased Abcg8/sterolin-2 mRNA in the heterozygote, although Abcg5/sterolin-1 mRNA appeared relatively unaffected in the knockout mice (panel c). Probes were approximately 1.9 kb for Abcg5 and 2 kb for Abcg8 (see Methods for more detail). RT-PCR analyses of hepatic cDNA showed no Abcg8/sterolin-2 message, downstream of exon 4 in the Abcg8-/- mice, whether primers were located in exons 4 and 13 (panel d), exons 9 and 13 or exons 10 and 13 (panel e).

Figure 2

Free versus esterified sterol levels in the livers of Abcg8+/+, Abcg8+/- and Abcg8-/- mice. Sterol contents of liver extracts of 12-week-old female mice fed a regular chow diet, determined by GC analysis show that the majority of sterols in all genotypes are unesterified. Esterified cholesterol (panel a) remains relatively constant for each genotype. However, no esterified sitosterol in the livers from Abcg8+/+ and Abcg8+/- mice and very little from Abcg8-/- mice was detected (panel b). Small amounts of esterified campesterol were detected in each of the genotypes (panel c).

Figure 3

Lipid profiles of the plasma of Abcg8+/+, Abcg8+/- and Abcg8-/- mice. Lipoproteins were separated from pooled mouse plasma samples by FPLC. Total sterols (panel a) and triglyceride (panel b) profiles of the fractions are shown. There was no difference of cholesterol profiles in the groups, but there was a small triglyceride peak in Abcg8-/- mice in fractions 21–25, corresponding to the LDL-size range, the significance of which is not known at present.

Figure 4

Analyses of mRNA expression and enzyme activity in mouse livers. Panel (a) shows RT-PCR quantitation of mRNA levels for Abcg5, Abcg8, Hmgr, Cyp7a1, Abca1, Mdr2, Lxr, Srebp-1c and Srebp-2 in mouse livers from Abcg8+/+ (open bars), Abcg8+/- (hatched bars) and Abcg8-/- (filled bars). Knockout mice showed an ~60% reduction in mRNA for Abcg5/sterolin-1 and an 80% reduction in the message for HMG CoA reductase. Relatively no message for Abcg8/sterolin-2 was detected in the knockout mice. Panel (b) shows the enzyme activities for HMG-CoA reductase and CYP7a1 in livers from Abcg8+/+, Abcg8+/- and Abcg8-/- mice. Activities of HMG-CoA reductase and CYP7a1 were significantly reduced in the Abcg8-/- mouse liver (*P < 0.05, see text for discussion).

Figure 5

N-glycosylation of Abcg5/sterolin-1 analyses in Abcg8-/- mouse liver. Mouse liver homogenate stained with SC anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 after treatment with Endo-H or PNGaseF shows a 75 kDa band present in both genotypes, which is resistant to deglycosylation (panel a). Staining of wild-type liver homogenate with preimmune serum showed no detectable bands. Lower portion of panel (a) shows the same aliquots stained for anti-transferrin as a control for deglycosylation. AMC anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 staining of mouse liver homogenate shows a 'mature' ~90 kDa band in the wild-type mice but not in the Abcg8-/- mice (panel b). A 75 kDa form is present which is sensitive to deglycosylation. Mouse liver homogenate stained with UTSW anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 shows a 'mature' ~90 kDa band and an 'immature' 75 kDa band in the wild-type mice but no signal is detected in the Abcg8-/- mice. Treatment with Endo-H or PNGaseF results in a lower molecular weight protein in the wild-type mice. Abcg5/Abcg8-/- liver homogenate used for negative control.

Figure 6

Immunohistochemical evaluation of mouse Abcg5/sterolin-1 expression in liver and intestine. COS-1 cells were transiently transfected with pCMV-mouse Abcg5 or pCMV-mouse Abcg8 constructs, allowed to express for 48 hours then fixed and incubated with antibody. pCMV empty vector transfected COS-1 cells incubated with SC anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 showed no significant fluorescence (panel a). Abcg5 transfected COS-1 cells incubated with SC anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibody showed a membrane distribution (panel b), where as Abcg8 transfected cells incubated with SC anti-Abcg5 antibody showed no significant fluorescence (panel c). Abcg5 and Abcg8 co-transfected COS-1 cells incubated with SC anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibody resulted in a fluorescence pattern similar to Abcg5 alone (panel d). The yellow bar represents 20 μm. Wild-type intestine incubated with SC pre-immune serum (panel e), or SC anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibody pre-incubated with the blocking peptide (panel f) showed no specific signals. Wild-type, Abcg8+/- and Abcg8-/- intestine (panels g, h and i respectively) incubated with SC anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibody, showed no difference in expression patterns, despite the loss of Abcg8/sterolin-2 in the knockout mice. Single arrowhead shows intestinal villus and double arrowhead shows crypt. The yellow bar represents 50 μm. Antibody staining of liver sections was also performed at the AMC Liver Center. As a control, an antibody to Bsep/Abcb11 was used and showed a clear apical distribution in both wild-type (panel j) and Abcg8 knockout mice (panel k). Using AMC antibody against Abcg5/sterolin-1 (see text), in both wild-type (panel l) and Abcg8 knockout liver (panel m), the pattern of expression was also apical and unchanged although the signal is fainter compared to that for Bsep/Abcb11 (see text for discussion). Arrows indicate bile canaliculi.

Figure 7

Immunohistochemical evaluation of mouse Abcg5/sterolin-1 expression in liver. Wild-type liver incubated with UTSW anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 resulted in apical expression (panel a). Merged image clearly shows the apical distribution. Likewise Abcg8-/- liver incubated with the same UTSW anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibody resulted in a similar apical expression pattern relative to the wild type (panel b). White arrows indicate bile canaliculi and asterisk indicates a bile duct. The yellow bar represents 50 μm.

Figure 8

Biliary sterol, phospholipid and bile salt analyses. Bile salt, sterol and phospholipid contents from male Abcg8+/+ (n = 8), Abcg8+/- (n = 7), and Abcg8-/- (n = 5) mice were examined as described in Methods. Bile salt secretion following a 10 minute collection was lower in Abcg8+/- and Abcg8-/- mice compared to wild type (panel a), but these differences were not statistically significant. Biliary sterol and phospholipid were significantly reduced in the Abcg8-/- mice compared to the wild-type (panels b and c). *P < 0.05. The lower panel shows biliary bile salt, sterol and phospholipid secretion rates from female Abcg8+/+ (n = 5), Abcg8+/- (n = 4), and Abcg8-/- (n = 3) mice measured following 90-minute bile salt depletion followed by stepwise TUDC infusion as described in the text. Bars represent phase TUDC infusion rates. No differences were observed in the ability of the Abcg8-/- mice to secrete bile salts (panel d), but there is a marked inability of the knockout mice to secrete sterols (panel e) and a trend towards a reduced ability to secrete phospholipid (panel f) compared to wild type.

Figure 9

Biliary cholesterol and sitosterol secretion. Biliary sterols were analyzed by GC analyses in Abcg8+/+ (n = 4), Abcg8+/- (n = 3) and Abcg8-/- (n = 4) mice following 30-minute bile salt depletion followed by a continuous TUDC infusion as described in Methods. Abcg8-/- mice were unable to secrete cholesterol into bile with forced TUDC administration relative to the wild-type mice (panel a, *P < 0.05). Interestingly, the Abcg8-/- mice were able to still secrete sitosterol (panel b) and campesterol (panel c). Heterozygous mice showed an increased ability to secrete all sterols with forced TUDC administration, although the results were not statistically significant.

Table 1

Oligonucleotide primers used for quantitative RT-PCR

Table 2

Mouse plasma and tissue sterol analyses

Animals used in these studies were 12 weeks of age, a mixture of male and female and fed a regular chow diet. *P < 0.05 for -/- versus +/+ and -/- versus +/-. ND, not detectable.Dopamine D2 receptors mediate two-odor discrimination and reversal learning in C57BL/6 mice

Abstract

Background

Dopamine modulation of neuronal signaling in the frontal cortex, midbrain, and striatum is essential for processing and integrating diverse external sensory stimuli and attaching salience to environmental cues that signal causal relationships, thereby guiding goal-directed, adaptable behaviors. At the cellular level, dopamine signaling is mediated through D1-like or D2-like receptors. Although a role for D1-like receptors in a variety of goal-directed behaviors has been identified, an explicit involvement of D2 receptors has not been clearly established. To determine whether dopamine D2 receptor-mediated signaling contributes to associative and reversal learning, we compared C57Bl/6J mice that completely lack functional dopamine D2 receptors to wild-type mice with respect to their ability to attach appropriate salience to external stimuli (stimulus discrimination) and disengage from inappropriate behavioral strategies when reinforcement contingencies change (e.g. reversal learning).

Results

Mildly food-deprived female wild-type and dopamine D2 receptor deficient mice rapidly learned to retrieve and consume visible food reinforcers from a small plastic dish. Furthermore, both genotypes readily learned to dig through the same dish filled with sterile sand in order to locate a buried food pellet. However, the dopamine D2 receptor deficient mice required significantly more trials than wild-type mice to discriminate between two dishes, each filled with a different scented sand, and to associate one of the two odors with the presence of a reinforcer (food). In addition, the dopamine D2 receptor deficient mice repeatedly fail to alter their response patterns during reversal trials where the reinforcement rules were inverted.

Conclusions

Inbred C57Bl/6J mice that develop in the complete absence of functional dopamine D2 receptors are capable of olfaction but display an impaired ability to acquire odor-driven reinforcement contingencies. Furthermore, the ability of dopamine D2 receptor deficient mice to adjust their responding to a previously reinforced stimulus when unexpected outcomes are encountered is significantly impaired. These findings suggest that signaling mediated by the dopamine D2 receptor is important for regulating associative and reversal learning and may have implications for the treatment of human attention disorders.

Background

Reinforcement-mediated associative learning, or the ability to ascribe deterministic relationships between environmental stimuli that signal the probability of receiving a primary reinforcer (e.g. food), has been divided into 3 components or stages [1]. The first, unlearned stage is the organism's experience with a primary reinforcer that elicits some unlearned/innate physiological response (e.g. palatability of a food or satiety). The second phase involves the attachment of salience to external stimuli (discriminative stimuli) that signal whether the delivery of a primary reinforcer will or will not occur based on some emitted behavior (e.g. a rodent lever presses for food pellets only when a stimulus light is illuminated in an operant chamber). Finally, there is the maintenance of associative learning relationships over time (a stimulus light always signifies a food pellet is available subsequent to a lever press) [see refs. [1,2] for review]. Berridge and Robinson [1] have proposed that dopamine plays a pivotal role in the second phase of reinforcement-mediated associative learning by molding the "incentive salience" or learned motivational properties of conditioned stimuli. In support of this view are several studies demonstrating that the disruption of dopamine signaling via acute blockade of dopamine receptors with dopamine receptor antagonists [3-9] or 6-OHDA lesions [1,10,11] do not disrupt phase 1, the palatability or primary reinforcing characteristics of a natural reinforcer (e.g. palatability) but disrupt phase 2, the formation of incentive salience.

Dopamine signaling is mediated at the cellular level by two major subclasses of G-protein coupled receptors that are referred to as D-1 like (D1aR, D1b/5R) or D-2 like (D2R, D3R, D4R) [12,13]. Although individual genes code for each dopamine receptor subtype, there is considerable pharmacological overlap between D1-like and D2-like receptors. Several studies have used pharmacological manipulations to investigate the contribution of dopamine receptor subtypes in various stages of associative learning [1,2,14]. Currently it is held that excitatory dopamine D1Rs mediate the acquisition and expression of several conditioned behaviors involving food reinforcers [e.g. [6,7]] as well as responding for conditioned cues predictive of cocaine delivery [9] – consistent with the interpretation that D1R mediated signaling might modulate the maintenance of stimulus-response outcomes. Despite a growing literature demonstrating disrupted associative learning following acute manipulations of dopamine D1R signaling during acquisition of associative learning tasks with food [e.g. [6,7]], the actual contribution of D2R-mediated signaling on acquisition and maintenance of associative learning in rodents is unresolved.

While D2R antagonists have been used in the context of rodent associative learning paradigms, their lack of receptor subtype specificity [13] and motor-disrupting effects [6,8] have prevented a rigorous examination of the actual role this dopamine receptor subtype plays in associative and reversal learning in the context of an operant behavior. Past experiments seeking to explore the possible involvement of dopamine D2Rs in associative learning have utilized low to moderate doses of drugs [2,5,6] and site-specific administration [7,9] in order to avoid the confounding effect that locomotor disruption associated with acute D2R blockade can have on learning performance in rodents. Besides their lack of receptor subtype specificity, an acute exposure to commercially available D2 receptor antagonists fails to completely block signaling mediated solely by D2Rs. Moreover, acute dosing does not recapitulate the marked learning deficits produced in rodents [15,16] by chronic exposure to dopamine D2R antagonists [6,7].

The influence of dopamine D2R-mediated signaling on reversal learning is also poorly understood. Reversal learning can be conceptualized as the ability to recognize an unexpected consequence to a previously established associative learning rule and then alter response strategies accordingly [17,18]. Reversal learning in rodents can serve as an index of learning adaptability and alertness that correlates with human attentional-shift paradigms [17,18]. Additionally, a previous report demonstrated that excitotoxic lesions of terminal field targets of mesocortical dopamine have been shown to disrupt reversal learning [19]. Administration of the D2R/D3R antagonist, sulpiride, impairs spatial reversal leaning in mice [20] and has also been shown to impair attention and the cognitive performances of healthy human volunteers [21]. Moreover an inverse relationship between lower dopamine D2R levels and compulsive behavior in human subjects has been reported [22]. Taken together these findings suggest that D2R-mediated signaling could play a critical role in reversal learning but are insufficient to prove it.

In an effort to establish the contribution of dopamine D2 receptor-mediated signaling to associative and non-spatial reversal learning in adult mice, we compared mice [23] that had developed in the complete absence of all functional dopamine D2 receptors (D2R-/-) to wild-type littermates (D2R+/+) in a go/no-go operant learning procedure that measures primary reinforcement, sensory processing, and reversal learning [17-19]. Here we report that dopamine D2R-mediated signaling must be intact if a mouse is to efficiently learn to associate a food reinforcer with a specific odor and then adaptively disengage inappropriate behavioral strategies following the reversal of reinforcement contingencies.

Results

Both wild-type and D2R deficient mice learn operant behaviors equally well

Mildly food-deprived D2R+/+ and D2R-/- mice readily learned to locate and consume food pellets during both training sessions. Figure 1 depicts the latency for both genotypes to ambulate to a dish to retrieve an unhidden food pellet. There were no differences between genotypes to retrieve the reinforcers (F1,59 = 0.2, p > 0.65), and both groups significantly decreased the amount of time necessary to perform this task along successive trials (F4,59 = 5.74, p < 0.001). Figure 2 depicts the latency to dig for the food pellet buried in a single dish filled with unscented sand. No genotype differences were found in the ability to dig through unscented sand for a hidden food pellet (F1,128 = 1.26, p > 0.27).

Wild-type mice outperform D2R-/- mice in an odor-driven, stimulus-discrimination, operant task

To master the odor-driven stimulus discrimination task, D2R-/- mice required significantly more trials (Fig. 3A: t(14) = 2.20; p < 0.05) and committed more errors (Fig. 3B: t(14) = 2.92; p < 0.05) than D2R+/+ mice to learn to associate a specific odor with the presence or absence of the food reinforcer. However, both genotypes did learn the task and eventually maintained accurate discrimination for a minimum of 8 correct responses out of 10 trials.

Mice lacking dopamine D2 receptors engage in unreinforced behavior in a perseverative manner following reversal of reinforcement contingencies

D2R-/- mice repeatedly failed to inhibit previously established learning contingencies during reversal trials (Fig. 4A: t(14) = 3.54; p < 0.01) and committed significantly more reversal errors than D2R+/+ mice (Fig. 4B: t(14)= 3.18; p < 0.01). Categorical division of reversal errors (Ferry et al., 2000) – digging in the dish that did not contain the food pellet (S-) (error of commission; Fig. 5A) versus failing to respond within 3-min of presentation (error of omission; Fig. 5B) revealed that both genotypes chiefly committed errors of commission versus errors of omission (D2R-/- mice, U = 0.00; p < 0.01; D2R+/+ mice U = 9.00, p < 0.05), D2R-/- mice committed more commission errors than D2R+/+ mice (U = 5.00, p < 0.05), and there were no differences between D2R-/- and D2R+/+ mice in omission errors (U = 27.5, p = 0.65). Moreover, the number of commission errors committed during the first reversal session (an index of stimulus bound perseveration, where all animals are responding to the reversed contingencies for the first time; Fig. 6) indicated a deficit in the D2R-/- mice compared to the D2R+/+ mice (U = 8.5, p < 0.01). Finally, in an attempt to assess whether perseveration occurred across multiple reversal sessions (Fig. 7), we analyzed the number of commission errors emitted before relearning the reinforcement contingencies during the reversal sessions. The data depicted were collected from subjects that had not achieved the 80% performance criterion. Therefore, the number of D2R+/+ mice represented in session #1 is 8, in session #2 n = 8, session #3 n = 6 (2 mice met our criterion), in session # 4 n = 5 (three met the criterion). Following session 5, the remaining 5 D2R+/+ mice had met criteria. For the D2R-/- mice, each point on the graph represents 8 subjects. None of the D2R-/- mice achieved the criterion of 80% accuracy by session 5. For the overall 2-way ANOVA, there was a significant difference between genotypes for the number of perseverative errors (F1,51 = 16.61, p < 0.001).

Discussion

In this study, we sought to determine the contribution of dopamine D2 receptor-mediated signaling to the various stages of associative and reversal learning. D2R-/- mice demonstrated that they were capable of learning to locate and consume food pellets, indicating that their locomotor behavior was not detectably disrupted and their primary motivation to obtain a natural reinforcer (food pellet) was undisturbed. Rather, the impaired ability of D2R-/- mice to assign appropriate discriminative stimulus relationships in an operant discrimination task argues that D2R-mediated signaling contributes to the neuronal processes involved in attaching salience to environmental stimuli. The deficient capacity of D2R-/- mice to disengage inappropriate decision strategies strongly argues that mesolimbic dopamine signaling, mediated by dopamine D2Rs is essential for efficient reversal learning to occur.

Mice with or without intact dopamine D2R-mediated signaling displayed similar decreases in latencies to retrieve unhidden food pellets (Fig. 1) and learned to dig for food buried in unscented sand (Fig. 2). These findings are in complete agreement with earlier studies that utilized rats and fairly selective D2R antagonists [3-8], as well as even very extensive 6-OHDA lesions [1,10,11] in associative and operant learning paradigms. Our results add to a growing literature demonstrating a negligible role of dopamine, and now, specifically, D2Rs in the unconditioned or hedonic value of natural (food) reinforcers [1,2].

The comparatively poor skill of D2R-/- mice during discrimination trials suggests a role for D2Rs in acquisition of appropriate S+/S- relationships in operant associative learning. Several studies have demonstrated that both the acquisition [6,7] and expression [9] of associative learning are mediated by dopamine D1Rs. Most literature reviews identify dopamine D1Rs with dopamine-mediated learning and D2Rs with motor related behaviors [e.g. [24]]. Moreover, it has been reported that acute administration of the dopamine D2/3 antagonist, raclopride, actually improves acquisition of food-motivated associative learning [6]. However, only acute administrations of antagonists were given, and learning was not measured during complete D1R or D2R blockade [6]. Significantly, the reports cited above failed to address the technical limitations of the approach: i.e. that the antagonists used lack adequate subtype specificity and only partially blocked D2R-mediated signaling thus making it impossible to rigorously assess the role of D2R-mediated signaling in associative and reversal learning. Additionally, none of these studies addressed the observation that the effects of D2R antagonists on locomotion and learning depend on whether exposure is chronic or acute [e.g. [15,16]].

That D2R-mediated signaling orchestrates just motor components of learning is a conclusion that is potentially biased due to the practice of avoiding doses of drugs that induce catalepsy (and therefore measuring only partial blockade of dopamine D2Rs) and single administrations [e.g. [3]]. Quite possibly, the functional role of D2Rs in associative learning might be masked because of this concern about locomotor disruption [2,6,8]. Doses of raclopride as low as 0.5 mg/kg significantly disrupt motor behavior [25], although this peripheral dose is consistently used in learning paradigms [e.g. [6]]. One might then ask: "How then could the role of D2Rs in associative learning be dissociated from motor behavior?" Seminal experiments [26-28] have clearly demonstrated that repeated administration of catalepsy-inducing doses of D2R antagonists in rodents actually leads to a striking behavioral tolerance to catalepsy. These doses have been shown to occupy well over 80% of available D2Rs [29]. Future experiments measuring acquisition of associative learning in rodents that received chronic administration of D2R antagonists and demonstrated behavioral tolerance to their motor disrupting effects would be a logical test of this hypothesis. However, the realization that multiple dopamine receptor subtypes would be concurrently targeted with the presently commercially available antagonists, such as D2Rs, D3Rs, and D4Rs would have to be rectified. We would argue that the most parsimonious approach at this time is to utilize mice that have been genetically altered such that they are lacking one or both functional alleles of the specific receptor of interest. While they do have their limitations (e.g. developmental compensation and strain effects in mouse lines not backcrossed adequately to a parental strain for a minimum of 10 generations), use of our inbred (N20 generation) animals in the present study (where no differences in locomotor behavior were detected between D2R-/- and D2R+/+ mice; Figs. 1 &2) revealed a previously unappreciated role of D2R-mediated signaling in associative learning and attention that could not be measured with the currently available, acutely administered D2R antagonists.

A cursory analysis of our data might suggest to some that the genetic manipulation of the drd2 locus conferred a gross olfactory impairment to the D2R-/- mice. Rather, we argue that this is not likely because the D2R-/- mice did learn to retrieve the food pellets from the dishes and eventually learned to accurately discriminate odors. Recent electrophysiological data demonstrate that dopamine D2R's are located on glutamatergic terminal axons of olfactory nerves and depress excitatory input of the olfactory nerve to the mitral cells of the olfactory bulb [30,31]. Consequently, our data, and data from other studies, suggest that the complete lack of D2Rs in the olfactory bulb does not prevent transduction of olfactory stimuli; rather it affects the ability to habituate, or tune, olfactory nerve activity associated with repeatedly encountered concentrations of chemical stimuli [32].

The performance of D2R-/- mice during reversal learning is deficient revealing a role for dopamine D2R-mediated signaling in tasks requiring behavioral flexibility

Perseverative behavioral patterns characterized the D2R-/- mice relative to D2R+/+ mice during reversal learning sessions (Figure 4), manifested during early reversal trials (Figure 6) and persisted across several sessions (Figure 7). These findings are significant because D2R-/- mice respond to food reinforcers and ultimately form and maintain odor-driven S+/S- relationships (a putative D1R-mediated behavior [6]) just as D2R+/+ mice (both groups achieved ≥ 80% discrimination accuracy, the dopamine D1Rs in our mice were not targeted). A future extension of this study would be to test performance over a fixed number of trials and determine patterns of error rates during acquisition of the discrimination and reversal learning tasks. This manipulation would control the number of errors based on trials performed to determine if the apparent difference in absolute number of errors demonstrated by the mutant mice (the putative performance deficit) is simply a reflection of extra trials. Nonetheless, the inability of D2R-/- mice to disengage from previously established S+/S- contingencies (responding to a discriminative stimulus; Fig. 4) strongly argues that mesolimbic dopamine, and in particular dopamine D2R-mediated signaling, modulates the process of alerting the subject that familiar contingencies are now associated unexpected consequences.

Schultz and colleagues have demonstrated that dopamine cells display consistent tonic firing patterns during maintenance of associative learning tasks [33]. However, phasic burst activity of dopaminergic cells occurs when discrepancies between predicted and actual reinforcement contingencies transpire [14]. This robust increase of dopaminergic cell activation in response to unpredicted outcomes has been referred to as an "error" signal [14]. To date, the molecular basis of this error signal has not been identified. The inability of the D2R-/- mice to desist responding to a previously reinforced stimulus suggests that the dopamine D2R might in fact be the focal point of this error-signaling cascade.

Electrophysiological data further support the hypothesis that signaling mediated by dopamine D2Rs tunes D1R-mediated mesocorticolimbic output. Calabresi et al. [34] demonstrated that tetanic stimulation of dorsal striatum slices prepared from D2R-/- mice is associated with enhanced EPSP and as a result increased striatal synaptic efficacy. In contrast, stimulation of dorsal striatum slices from wild-type mice resulted in IPSP activity, long-term depression, and decreased neuronal activity of striatal efferents [34]. Carlsson and colleagues [35] have speculated that dopamine D2R stimulation in the striatum serves to "brake" or diminish excitatory corticostriatal signaling and plasticity. Indeed, perseverative behavior is associated with over activity of the dorsal striatum in rodents [36] and over activity of the caudate in patients with ADHD [37] and a strong inverse correlation of D2R binding with compulsive behavior has been reported [22]. Importantly, our data indicate that the poor performances displayed by the D2R-/- mice are manifestations of reversal learning deficits and not gross motivational or sensory impairments. We therefore argue that D2Rs participate in signaling or alerting the organism of learning contingency changes during reversal learning and sculpt ongoing goal-directed behavior.

Conclusions

This study demonstrates that signaling by dopamine D2Rs does not mediate the hedonic value of reinforcers, supporting and refining earlier findings [1,2]. However, mice completely deficient in D2Rs demonstrated disrupted acquisition of discriminative stimulus relationships and an impaired ability to recognize changes in behavioral determinants. Therefore, we suggest that during associative learning or when unexpected reinforcement outcomes are modified (reversal learning) dopamine-driven reinforcement impulses involve signaling mediated by dopamine D2Rs. In the course of associative learning, striatal synapses [38] receive experience-driven gain [7], thus permitting newly established reinforcement-mediated signals to traverse ascending efferents en route to the frontal cortex, completing a functional limbic/motor circuit [39-41]. Possibly, the lack of dopamine D2R-mediated signaling prevents refinement of the corticostriatal reinforcement circuits in the brains of the D2R-/- mice, thus impairing their ability to form S+/S- contingencies and disengage inappropriate dopamine D1R-mediated associative responding when unexpected consequences to goal-directed behaviors happened. Consequently, we are compelled to conclude that the perseverative performance deficits demonstrated by the D2R-/- mice in the tasks used in the present study reveal a previously unreported role for D2Rs in associative and reversal learning.

Methods

Subjects

The sixteen, 8–10 week old, 25–30 g mice (8 per genotype) used in this study were the congenic offspring of breeders that were descendants of the original F2 hybrid (129/Sv × C57BL/6J; Kelly et al., 1997) that was backcrossed to inbred C57Bl/6J stock (Jackson Laboratories, ME). This breeding strategy was repeated for 20 successive generations with the gender of the donor/mutant alternating with each generation. All experimental subjects were genotyped by PCR as previously described [23]. All testing occured randomly across estrous cycles. The Department of Comparative Medicine at Oregon Health and Science University approved all protocols, and all animals were maintained in accordance to National Institutes of Health's Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

Experimental procedures

Odor discrimination training and testing

A 2-odor discrimination paradigm was chosen because it permits a measure of attentional focus in goal-directed behavior. Odor discrimination was chosen as the particular task because it is a highly robust behavior in rodents [18]. To minimize experimental error, the experimenter was blind to genotype during testing. Mice were mildly food deprived to approximately 85% ad libitum weight. Dopamine D2R-/- and D2R+/+ mice (n = 8 per group) were initially trained to ambulate the length of a polyvinyl mouse cage (30-cm) to retrieve ~30-mg of Pico® fat supplemented rodent food located in a small plastic cup (3-cm) attached to the floor of the testing apparatus with Velcro. Each subject received five trials, and the latency to locate and start to consume the food pellet was recorded manually with a standard hand-held stopwatch. Twenty-four hours later subjects were trained to ambulate towards and dig through the same 3-cm dish filled with sterile sand to locate a food pellet buried underneath the sand. Subjects received 10 trials. If a mouse failed to locate a food pellet within 10-min of the first trial, an additional food pellet was dropped on top of the dish. This manipulation usually ensured that a subject would dig through the sand to locate the original pellet and learn this task.

The next day, mice were presented to the testing apparatus that now contained 2 dishes, each filled with different scented sand. One odor signaled that a food reinforcer was buried in that particular dish (S+) while the other odor signaled that no reinforcer was contained within that particular dish (S-). The sand was scented by adding 0.80 grams of either cinnamon or dill weed to 98.8 grams of autoclaved playground sand purchased from a local farm and garden store. Finally, 0.40 grams of finely ground food was mixed with the scented sand in order to mask any odor emitted by the food reinforcer in the S+ dish. This final mixture did not appear to be palatable to the subjects. A trial terminated when the mouse: dug in the correct dish and consumed the hidden pellet, or began to dig in the incorrect dish. Digging was considered the actual physical displacement of sand with the forepaws and/or snout. Placing forelimbs on either of the dishes and sniffing was not considered digging and was not penalized or scored. Each completed trial was separated by a 20-sec inter-trial-interval (ITI). Preliminary experiments demonstrated that an extended time-out period following an incorrect response was not required to ensure goal-directed behavior in the wild-type or mutant mice for this particular task (data not shown). Therefore, the 20-sec ITI was used to separate all trials (successful and unsuccessful). The S+ and S- scents were counterbalanced across subjects in order to control for potential scent bias (pilot data suggest there are no biases, data not shown). Following accurate discrimination, defined as 8 correct retrievals across 10 consecutive trials, reversal trials began.

Reversal learning measurement

We next investigated the contribution of dopamine D2Rs to reversal learning behavior by inverting the reinforcement contingencies – now the former S+ signaled no reinforcer and the previous S- now indicated reinforcement availability. This manipulation permits an evaluation of the ability to inhibit responses to previously reinforced discriminative stimuli [18]. The number of trials necessary to establish 8 out of 10 accurate responses was our definition of successful reversal learning.

Data analysis

The latency to retrieve a pellet from an empty dish, the latency to dig through a dish filled with unscented sand, and the number of errors of commission committed across the reversal sessions were analyzed with 2-way analyses of variance (genotype × trials). The number of trials necessary to attain criterion performance in odor discrimination (8 correct responses across 10 consecutive trials) and errors committed while learning the discrimination tasks were separated as individual testing phases (e.g. odor discrimination and reversal learning) and analyzed separately with unpaired 2-tailed t-tests. Significance was established at p < 0.05. Errors committed during reversal trials were further categorically separated as errors of commission (failing to withhold responding to S-) and errors of omission (failing to dig in either dish after 3-min had expired). Categorical errors and number of commission errors committed during the first reversal learning session were analyzed between groups with nonparametric Mann-Whitney U tests.

Authors' contributions

PJK designed and ran all of the experiments, analyzed the data, and co-wrote the manuscript. DKG oversaw and facilitated the experiments and co-wrote the manuscript.

Acknowledgements

This study was supported by grants DA07262 (PJK), DA12062 (DKG), and MH067497 (DKG). We thank Katherine M. Suchland for her excellent technical assistance.

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Mice lacking dopamine D2 receptors acquire a goal-directed behavior similar to wild-type mice. Both genotypes readily learned to retrieve food pellets from a small dish and significantly decreased their latencies to perform this task across trials (* p < 0.001).

Figure 2

Wild-type and D2R-deficient mice perform the digging task equally well. No differences in responding as a function of genotype were found, and similar latencies to retrieve the reinforcer were seen. These response patterns suggest that the training from the previous day influenced behavior, demonstrating that both genotypes are capable of learning and retaining goal-directed behaviors.

Figure 3

Dopamine D2 receptor-mediated signaling contributes to the acquisition of odor discrimination/associative learning. Wild-type (D2R+/+) mice outperformed (mean + standard error) the D2R-/- mice during acquisition of (A) odor discrimination (*p < 0.05), and (B) committed significantly fewer discrimination errors (*p < 0.01) during the discrimination task.

Figure 4

D2R-/- mice perseverate in unreinforced behavior during reversal learning trials. The number of necessary trials (mean + standard error) to (A) demonstrate reversal learning (*p < 0.01), and (B) reversal errors committed (*p < 0.01) by D2R-/- and D2R+/+ mice.

Figure 5

Reversal learning measures reveal D2R-/- mice emit significantly more errors of commission but not errors of omission than D2R+/+ mice. Response patterns (mean + standard error) by D2R-/- mice are more suggestive of stimulus bound perseveration and not extinction. D2R-/- mice committed significantly more errors of commission (A) than D2R+/+ mice (*p < 0.01), but no differences in errors of omission (B) were observed between genotypes (p > 0.6).

Figure 6

Mice lacking functional D2Rs display an inability to withhold inappropriate responses. Response patterns during first 10 reversal trials reveal deficits in mice lacking D2Rs. When the mice encountered the inverted reinforcement contingencies during the first reversal learning session, the D2R-/- mice demonstrated an almost complete inability to inhibit responding to previously reinforced stimuli compared to D2R+/+ mice (* p < 0.001).

Figure 7

D2R-/- mice commit significantly more perseverative errors across reversal sessions than wild-type mice. An analysis of the time course of responding for errors of commission across the first four reversal sessions revealed that the D2R-/- committed several more errors of commission than the D2R+/+ mice (*p < 0.001).Structure-function evolution of the Transforming acidic coiled coil genes revealed by analysis of phylogenetically diverse organisms

Abstract

Background

Examination of ancient gene families can provide an insight into how the evolution of gene structure can relate to function. Functional homologs of the evolutionarily conserved transforming acidic coiled coil (TACC) gene family are present in organisms from yeast to man. However, correlations between functional interactions and the evolution of these proteins have yet to be determined.

Results

We have performed an extensive database analysis to determine the genomic and cDNA sequences of the TACCs from phylogenetically diverse organisms. This analysis has determined the phylogenetic relationship of the TACC proteins to other coiled coil proteins, the resolution of the placement of the rabbit TACC4 as the orthologue of human TACC3, and RHAMM as a distinct family of coiled coil proteins. We have also extended the analysis of the TACCs to the interaction databases of C. elegans and D. melanogaster to identify potentially novel TACC interactions. The validity of this modeling was confirmed independently by the demonstration of direct binding of human TACC2 to the nuclear hormone receptor RXRβ.

Conclusion

The data so far suggest that the ancestral TACC protein played a role in centrosomal/mitotic spindle dynamics. TACC proteins were then recruited to complexes involved in protein translation, RNA processing and transcription by interactions with specific bridging proteins. However, during evolution, the TACC proteins have now acquired the ability to directly interact with components of these complexes (such as the LSm proteins, nuclear hormone receptors, GAS41, and transcription factors). This suggests that the function of the TACC proteins may have evolved from performing assembly or coordination functions in the centrosome to include a more intimate role in the functional evolution of chromatin remodeling, transcriptional and posttranscriptional complexes in the cell.

Background

The evolution of complex organisms has been associated with the generation of gene families by the continual duplication of an initial relatively small set of ancestral genes. Through this process, followed by subsequent mutation, reduplication and exon shuffling between gene families, genes have evolved both discrete, and partially redundant functions with their related family members. With the completion of the genome sequencing projects of human, mouse, rat, fruit fly and nematodes, we are now in a position to ask fundamental questions in regard to how genes interact in the context of the whole organism. Thus, with the appropriate application of bioinformatics, it is now possible to trace the lineage of particular genes and gene families, with related gene families in other organisms. Furthermore, with the growing amount of large-scale proteomic and genomic data becoming publicly available, this analysis can now be extended to reveal the complex interplay between evolution of gene structure and protein function.

The first Transforming acidic coiled coil gene, TACC1, was identified during the development of an expression map of the proximal short arm of human chromosome 8 [1]. Two additional TACC family members were subsequently identified and mapped to paralogous chromosomal regions on human chromosomes 4p16 and 10q26, physically close to members of the FGFR gene family [1-3]. This mapping data, together with identification of a single TACC gene in the protostomes Caenorhabitis elegans, and Drosophila melanogaster [4-6], led to the speculation that the ancestral FGFR and TACC genes were located physically close to each other. Thus, during the evolution of vertebrates, subsequent successive duplications of the ancestral gene cluster have given rise to three TACC family members located close to FGFR genes in humans. In accordance with the proposed quadruplication of the vertebrate genome during evolution, there is a fourth FGFR family member in vertebrates, raising the question of whether a fourth TACC gene is associated with FGFR4 in vertebrate genomes. To date, only three active TACC genes have been cloned in humans [1-3], one in each of mouse [7], Xenopus laevis [8], D. melanogaster [4], and C. elegans [5,6]. Although two additional new candidate TACC family members, Oryctolagus cuniculus TACC4 [9] and human RHAMM [10] have been proposed, their true identity and placement in the evolution of the TACC family is under debate. Thus, the identification and functional characterization of new members of the TACC family in other organisms, alternatively spliced isoforms of each TACC and comparison of the phylogenetic relationship of these genes relative to other members of the coiled coil superfamily will resolve this issue and provide clues to the evolution of TACC function.

Results and Discussion

In silico identification of TACC family members from vertebrate and invertebrate lineages

Sequence similarity searches of the publicly available genome databases with the BLAST and TBLAST programs were performed to identify TACC and RHAMM orthologues, and other members of the coiled coil superfamily in a diverse set of species (Fig. 1). This identified the complete sequence of the TACC genes in representatives of five major phylogenetically distinct clades. Where possible, the construction of the TACC sequences from these organisms was also confirmed by the analysis of the cDNA databases. Several partial sequences in other vertebrate species, the echinodermate Strongylocentrotus purpuratus and the protostome insect Anopheles gambiae were also identified, suggesting an ancient conservation of the TACC genes in metazoan lineages. However, due to the relative infancy of the cDNA/genome projects for these latter organisms, complete characterization of these TACC genes could not be undertaken. No conclusion could be made about the existence of TACC-like sequence in non-bilaterian metazoans, such as Cnidaria or Porifera, due to the paucity of sequence information for these organisms, and additional definitive sequences with a defined TACC domain could not be found in other non-metazoan organisms.

Figure 1

Phylogenetic analysis of the TACC family members compared to other coiled coil proteins. The phylogenetic tree was constructed as described in the Methods section. The TACC family defines a separate subfamily of coiled coil containing proteins, distinct from other coiled coil families such as the keratins, RHAMM and tropomyosins. Note that the RHAMM proteins form a separate branch more closely related to the tropomyosins and kinesin like proteins (KLP), than the TACC proteins.

At the base of the chordate branch of life, a single TACC gene was identified in the genome of the urochordate Ciona intestinalis [11], and a partial TACC sequence from an analysis of the Halocynthia rortezi EST database [12]. This confirms the original assumption that a single TACC gene was present in the chordate ancestor. The next major event in the evolution of the chordate genome has been suggested to have occurred 687 ± 155.7 million years ago (MYA), with the first duplication of the chordate genome, and a second duplication occurring shortly thereafter. Thus, if the TACC genes were duplicated at both events, we would expect to identify four TACC genes in the most "primitive" compact vertebrate genome sequenced to date, the pufferfish Takifugu rubripes, with three genes corresponding to the human TACC1-3, and, in keeping with the proposed model for genomic duplication of the chromosomal loci for the TACC genes (discussed below), a possible fourth gene deriving from the TACC3 ancestor. Indeed, four TACC genes were identified in T. rubripes. Of these, two genes corresponded to the T. rubripes orthologues of human TACC2 and TACC3. However, the other two genes, trTACC1A and trTACC1B are clearly most related to TACC1 (Fig. 1). Although trTACC1A is highly homologous to trTACC1B, the latter encodes a significantly smaller predicted protein. The trTACC1B gene is encoded by 15 exons over approximately 7 kb of the Takifugu Scaffold 191 (see below). A search of this region using the trTACC1A sequence and gene prediction software has so far failed to identify additional exons of trTACC1B. However, given the intron/exon structure of this apparently complete gene, it appears likely that trTACC1B is active in the pufferfish, and presumably fulfils either a temporal-spatial specific function within the organism, or a distinct function from the larger trTACC1A product within the cell. Thus, based upon the surrounding chromosomal loci (see below), the trTACC1A and trTACC1B genes appear to have arisen from the duplication of the chromosomal segment containing the teleost TACC1 ancestor, during the additional partial genomic duplication that occurred in the teleost lineage. Therefore, this analysis of T. rubripes does not support the hypothesis that the region surrounding the TACC3 ancestor was included in the second round of vertebrate genomic duplication.

Examination of higher vertebrates led to the identification of splice variants of TACC1 and TACC2 in Mus musculus, and the assembly of the previously unidentified orthologues of TACC1-3 from Rattus norvegus. In addition, the TACC1X sequence was found on mouse chromosome X. This gene is clearly related to the mouse TACC1, however, further examination revealed a mouse B1 repeat distributed over the length of the proposed intron. In addition, no expression of TACC1X was detected in mouse RNA by rt-PCR analysis (data not shown), suggesting that this sequence is a processed pseudogene. Similarly, TACC1 pseudogenes also exist spread over 22 kb of the centromeric region of human chromosome 10 and, in 8q21, a shorter region 86% identical to the final 359 bp of the TACC1 3' untranslated region. No pseudogenes corresponding to TACC2 or TACC3 were identified in any mammalian species.

Characterization of vertebrate TACC3 orthologues

Based upon current functional analysis, the characterization of TACC3 orthologues is likely to be pivotal to understanding the sequence and functional evolution of the TACC gene family. As indicated below, the chromosomal region containing the TACC gene precursors was duplicated twice during vertebrate evolution. Although the analysis of T. rubripes, rodents and humans so far suggests that the vertebrate TACC3 precursor was not included in the second round of genomic duplication, it could not be excluded that a TACC4 gene may have been lost during the evolution of these lineages. The cloning of a new member of the TACC family in Oryctolagus cuniculus has added to this controversy [9]. Designated TACC4, the 1.5 kb cDNA was highly related, but proposed to be distinct from TACC3. However, Northern blot data suggested that this gene produces a single 2.3 kb transcript [9], indicating that the cloned cDNA was incomplete. The degree of similarity to the published sequence of human and mouse TACC3 suggested to us that TACC4 actually represents a partial rabbit TACC3 cDNA. To test this hypothesis, we set out to clone the complete rabbit TACC3 sequence, based upon the known features of human and mouse TACC3. We have previously noted that the N-terminal and C-terminal regions of the human and mouse TACC3 proteins are highly conserved ([2], see below). Therefore, based upon the sequence identity between these genes, we designed a consensus oligonucleotide primer, T3con2, that would be suitable for the identification of the region containing the initiator methionine of the TACC3 cDNAs from primates and rodents. Using this primer, in combination with the TACC4-specific RACE primer (RACE2), initially used by Steadman et al [9], we isolated a 1.5 kb PCR product from rabbit brain cDNA by rt-PCR. In combination with 3'RACE, this generated a consensus cDNA of 2283 bp which corresponds to the transcript size of 2.3 kb detected by the "TACC4" sequence reported in Figure 4 of Steadman et al [9]. Thus, while it remains possible that the "TACC4" sequence is an alternative splice product, or is the product of reduplication of the TACC3 gene (events that would be specific to the rabbit), the only transcript detected in rabbit RNA corresponds to the predicted transcript size of the TACC3 sequence that we have identified here. Furthermore, the string of nucleotides found at the 5' end of the "TACC4" sequence is also found at the 5' ends of a number of cDNA sequences (e.g. U82468, NM_023500), that were isolated by 5'RACE, suggesting that they may correspond to an artefact of the 5'RACE methodology used in their construction. The rabbit "TACC4" and the rabbit TACC3 sequence that we have isolated are also found on the same branch of the TACC phylogenetic tree with the other TACC3 orthologues, including maskin (Xenopus laevis), and the newly identified TACC3 sequences in Rattus norvegus, Gallus gallus, Silurana tropicalis, Danio rerio and T. rubripes, reported in this manuscript (Fig. 1). Thus, it is not in a separate branch that may be expected if the sequence was a distinct TACC family member.

Placement of the RHAMM gene in the phylogeny of the coiled coil gene family

Human RHAMM has also been proposed to be the missing fourth member of the TACC family [10]. Evidence used in support of this claim included its chromosomal location on 5q32 in humans (discussed below), its sequence similarity in its coiled coil domain to the TACC domain and the subcellular localization of the RHAMM protein in the centrosome. However, if RHAMM were a bona fide TACC family member, then we would predict its evolution would be similar to those of other TACC family members, and fit with the proposed evolution of the vertebrate genome. Thus, we set out to identify RHAMM orthologues and related genes in metazoans, so that a more complete phylogeny of the coiled coil super family could be generated. We identified a single RHAMM gene in all deuterostomes for which cDNA and/or genomic sequence was available, including C. intestinalis. No RHAMM gene was identified in insects or nematodes. This indicates that the RHAMM/TACC genes diverged after the protostome/deuterostome split 833–933 MYA, but prior to the echinodermata/urochordate divergence (>750 MYA). Significantly, sequence and phylogenetic analysis of coiled coil proteins (Fig. 1) clearly shows that RHAMM does not contain a TACC domain and instead forms a distinct family of proteins in the coiled coil superfamily, and is not a direct descendant of the ancestral TACC gene.

Evolution of the chromosomal segments containing the TACC genes

The phylogenetic tree of the FGFR genes closely resembles that of the vertebrate TACC1-3 genes. Recently, detailed analyses of the chromosomal regions containing the FGFR gene family in humans, mouse and the arthopod D. melanogaster have revealed the conservation of paralogous chromosomal segments between these organisms (Fig. 2, [13], Table 1 [see Additional file 1]). This has provided further support that an ancient chromosomal segment was duplicated twice during vertebrate evolution, with the first duplication that gave rise to the human chromosome 4p16/5q32-ter and human chromosome 8p/10q23-ter ancestors occurring in the early stages after the invertebrate divergence. This suggests that the ancestral FGFR-TACC gene pair most probably arose prior to the initial duplication and subsequent divergence of these paralogous chromosomal segments, estimated to have occurred 687 ± 155.7 MYA. This has raised the suggestion that a fourth TACC gene in vertebrates would reside in the same chromosomal region as FGFR4. Indeed this hypothesis has been used in support for the RHAMM gene as a member of the TACC family [10]. Human RHAMM maps to chromosome 5q32 in a region bounded by GPX3 and NKX2E. These loci separate two clusters of genes on human chromosome 5 that are paralogous with 4p16. Interestingly, these three clusters are located on different chromosomes in mouse and rat (Fig. 2), further suggesting that this cluster of genes was transposed into this region after the primate/rodent divergence.

Figure 2

Linear organization of gene clusters centering upon the chromosomal loci of the FGFR genes in humans. Paralogous genes present in at least two of the four loci are shown, with the exception of the region between GPX3 and NKX2E on chromosome 5, which appears to represent a series of intervening genes inserted after duplication of the 4p16/5q32-35 clusters, and genes mentioned in Fig. 3. Corresponding syntenic mouse chromosomal regions (mm*) are indicated. Takifugu rubripes scaffolds are shown (TR*) that contain more than one homologous gene from these clusters. Further details on the location of paralogous genes can be found in [see Additional file 1].

Because the conservation of gene order can also provide clues to the evolution of gene regulation, we next attempted to trace the evolution of these paralogous segments by examining the genome of the tunicate C. intestinalis [11] and the most "primitive" compact vertebrate genome sequenced to date, T. rubripes [14]. Although not fully assembled, examination of the genome of T. rubripes confirmed the presence of chromosomal segments paralogous to those found in higher vertebrates (Fig. 2). For instance, the orthologues of GPRK2L and RGS12 are found on T. rubripes scaffold 290 (emb|CAAB01000290.1), and within 300 kb of each other in human 4p16. The T. rubripes orthologues of FGFR3, LETM1 and WHSC1 are located on the same 166 kb genomic scaffold 251 (emb|CAAB01000166.1). Significantly, the three human orthologues of these genes are also located within 300 kb of each other on 4p16. Furthermore, TACC3 and FGFRL map to the overlapping scaffolds 1184/4669 (emb|CAAB01004668). Similarly, elements of these gene clusters, extending from HMP19 to GPRK6 in human chromosome 5q34-ter are also found in the pufferfish, with the T. rubripes orthologues of NSD1, FGFR4 and a RAB-like gene mapping on scaffold 407 (emb|CAAB01000407). However, there is no evidence for a gene corresponding to a TACC4 gene in any of these clusters.

As noted above, phylogenetic analysis of the TACC sequences indicate that there are two TACC1 related genes in the pufferfish. trTACC1B is located on the 180 kb scaffold 191 (emb|CAAB01000191.1), which also contains the orthologues of several genes located in human chromosome 8p21-11. Thus, this scaffold represents the more "developed" TACC1 chromosomal segment that is evident in higher vertebrates. On the other hand, the trTACC1A gene is located in the 396 kb scaffold 12 (emb|CAAB010012.1). This scaffold also contains the T. rubripes orthologues of MSX1, STX18, D4S234E and the predicted gene LOC118711, in addition to sequences with homology to LOXL, EVC, LOC159291, and the LDB family. Thus, scaffold 12 contains genes found in the regions of human chromosome 4 and 10 that also contain the loci for TACC3 and TACC2, respectively, and may therefore more closely resemble the genomic organization resulting from the initial duplication of the ancestral paralogous chromosomal segment.

Conserved paralogous clusters may result from the initial clustering of the genes in a relatively small ancestral genomic contig. Some evidence for the existence of "protoclusters" that could correspond to the paralogous chromosomal segments noted in higher vertebrates is present in the genome of the urochordate C. intestinalis [11]. For instance, the orthologues of FGFR, and WHSC1, carboxypeptidase Z and FLJ25359 cluster within an 85 kb region of the C. intestinalis genome and the human orthologues are still maintained in paralogous segments of 4p16, 8p and 10q (Fig. 3, [see Additional file 1]). However, it should be noted that no clusters of genes from the vertebrate paralogous segments are locate close to the TACC or RHAMM genes of C. intestinalis, indicating that the formation of the much larger paralogous segments encompassing the FGFR-TACC genes formed later in evolutionary time, or conversely have been subject to extensive rearrangement in tunicates. In combination with the examination of the T. rubripes genome, this also provides additional evidence that either the second round of duplication of the chromosomal segment that contained the FGFR3/4 ancestor did not include a TACC gene, or that such a gene was lost very early in vertebrate evolution, prior to the divergence of the Gnanthostome lineages. However, the final resolution of the initial evolution of these paralogous segment will await the sequencing of the amphioxus and lamprey genomes, which only have one FGFR gene, and therefore should only contain one copy of the other corresponding genes in this conserved segment.

Figure 3

Formation of protoclusters in Takifugu rubripes and Ciona intestinalis: (A): Structure of the genomic scaffolds containing the Takifugu rubripes trTACC1A and trTACC1B genes. Scaffold 12, the site for the trTACC1A gene contains genes found with either homologues or orthologues on the distal long arm of human chromosome 10 and 4p16. This scaffold, therefore, has some of the characteristics of the predicted immediate ancestor of the TACC1/TACC2 chromosomal segment. trTACC1B is found on scaffold 191, which contains orthologues of genes found in the proximal short arm of human chromosome 8. (B): Ciona intestinalis clusters containing genes found in paralogous segments on human 8, 4p16, 10q and 5q.

Figure 4

Genomic structure of the TACC genes. Conserved regions known to bind protein factors in all human TACC proteins are shown. The SDP repeat of human TACC1-3 is known to bind GAS41 ([3,15] and data not shown). The TACC domain binds ch-TOG and members of the Aurora kinases in all species examined to date. This motif is characteristically encoded by the 3' exons of the TACC genes. The size of the largest isoform for each gene is shown.

Comparative genomic structure of the TACC family

The genomic DNA sequences corresponding to the orthologous TACC genes of human, mouse, rat, pufferfish, C. intestinalis, D. melanogaster and C. elegans were extracted and analyzed by Genescan and BLAST to determine the genomic structure of each TACC gene. In some cases, for rat and pufferfish, exons were added or modified based on the best similarity of translated peptides to the corresponding mouse and human proteins. For regions with low sequence similarity in T. rubripes, genomic sequences  from the fresh water pufferfish, Tetraodon nigroviridis were used as additional means to verify the predicted exons.

The general structure of the TACC genes and proteins is depicted in Fig. 4. The main conserved feature of the TACC family, the TACC domain, is located at the carboxy terminus of the protein. In the case of the C. elegans TAC protein, this structure comprises the majority of the protein and is encoded by two of the three exons of the gene. In the higher organisms, D. melanogaster, and the deuterostomes C. intestinalis to human, this feature is also encoded by the final exons of the gene (five in D. melanogaster, seven in the deuterostome genes). Outside of the TACC domain, however, TACC family members show relatively little homology. It is interesting that each TACC gene contains one large exon, which shows considerable variability between TACC orthologues, and constitutes the main difference between the TACC3 genes in the vertebrates (see below). In deuterostomes, this exon contains the SDP repeat (or in the case of the murine TACC3's, a rodent-specific 24 amino acid repeat), which is responsible for the binding of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex component GAS41 [15,16].

Of the vertebrate TACC proteins, the TACC3 orthologues show the greatest variability in size and sequence, ranging in size from 599 amino acids for the rat TACC3 protein, to 942 amino acids in the Danio rerio protein. The reasons for these differences are apparent from the genomic structure of the TACC3 orthologues. TACC3 can be divided into three sections: a conserved N-terminal region (CNTR) of 108 amino acids, encoded by exons 2 and 3 in each vertebrate TACC3 gene, the conserved TACC domain distributed over the final seven exons, and a highly variable central region. The lack of conservation in both size and sequence of the central portion of the TACC3 proteins of human and mouse has been previously noted, and accounts for the major difference between these two orthologues [2]. The majority of this central portion, which contains the SDP repeat motifs, is encoded by one exon in human and the pufferfish (emb|CAAB01001184). In rodents, however, this region is almost entirely composed of seven 24 amino acid repeats, which are located in a single exon of the mouse and rat TACC3 genes. It has been previously reported that there are four mouse TACC3 splice variants that differ in the number of these repeats [2,7,17]. As these repeats are present in a single exon, it appears likely that these different sequences may be the result of the DNA polymerases used in the cDNA synthesis and/or PCR reaction stuttering through the repeat motif. The correct sequence, reported by Sadek et al [7], is the one used throughout the entirety of this manuscript. These repeats are not evident in the rabbit protein, or any other TACC protein, and may indicate that the rodent TACC3 has evolved distinct functions, as has already been noted for the amphibian Xenopus TACC3, maskin [8].

Alternative splicing in vertebrate TACC genes

Whereas exon shuffling can drive the functional diversification of gene families over evolutionary time, the temporal and/or tissue specific alternative splicing of a gene can give rise to functional diversification of a single gene during the development of an organism. Although no alternative splicing of TACC3 has been clearly documented, both temporal and tissue specific splicing is observed in the TACC1 and TACC2 genes. In the case of TACC2, an additional large (5 kb) exon accounts for the main difference between the major splice variants of the vertebrate TACC2 genes [3]. The alternative splicing of this exon suggests a major functional difference between the two TACC2 isoforms, TACC2s and TACC2l [3], as well as a significant difference between TACC2 and its closest TACC family relative, TACC1. However, the function of this region of the TACC2l isoform is current unknown.

Alternative splicing, together with differential promoter usage has already been noted for the human TACC1 gene [18,19]. In addition, as shown in Fig. 5, we have identified additional TACC1 isoforms that result from alternative splicing of exons 1b-4a. The functions of these different isoforms are unknown, however the region deleted from the shorter variants can include the binding site for LSm7 [20] (variants C, D, F-I), and/or the nuclear localization signals and binding site for GAS41 [15] and PCTAIRE2BP [20] (isoforms B-D, S). One of these isoforms, TACC1S is localized exclusively to the cytoplasm [19], suggesting that the shorter isoforms would not be able to interact with elements of the chomatin remodeling and/or RNA processing machinery in the nucleus. Thus, changes in the complement of TACC1 isoforms in the cell may result in alterations in cellular RNA metabolism at multiple levels, and may account for the observation that TACC1D and TACC1F isoforms are associated with tumorigenic changes in gastric mucosa [18].

Figure 5

Alternative splicing of the human TACC1 gene. (A): Seven splice variants have been identified for human TACC1 (A-F and S). We have also identified additional splice variants (G-I) from database analysis and rt-PCR analysis of human brain RNA. (B): Alternative splicing of TACC1 in the human brain. rt-PCR analysis confirms splicing of the untranslated exon 1a to exon 1, with retention of the originally defined start methionine (GB:NP_006274) (Variant A*, lanes 1 and 3). Exon 1a also splices to exon 2, removing the L-Sm7 binding motif (variant I, lanes 3,12 and 13). Variants that functionally delete exons 2 and/or 3, such as variant C (lane 15) also remove the predicted nuclear localization signals, and the binding domains for GAS41 and PCTAIRE2BP. These variants would retain the TACC domain, and therefore the potential to bind to ch-TOG and Aurora A kinase in the centrosome. Lane 1: EF/X1R, Lane 2: EF/BX647R, Lane 3: EF/6SPR, Lane 4: EF/1DR, Lane 5, EF/128R, Lane 6 X3F/X1R, Lane 7: X3F/BX647R, Lane 8: X3F/6SPR, Lane 9: X3F/1DR, Lane 10, X3F/128R, Lane 11: 1DF/X1R, Lane 12: 1DF/BX647R, Lane 13: 1DF/6SPR, Lane 14: 1DF/1DR, Lane 15: 1DF/128R, Lane 16: Biorad 1 kb+ Size ladder.

In silico modeling of the evolution of TACC protein function

The protein and genomic structure of the present day TACC family members suggests that the function of the ancestral TACC protein was mediated solely through the interactions of the conserved TACC domain. Using an in silico protein-protein interaction model based upon known mitotic spindle and centrosomal components, we have previously predicted a number of additional interactions that could be conserved between a functional TACC homologue in yeast, spc-72, and one or more human TACC proteins [21]. Thus, it is known that all the TACC proteins examined to date interact, via the TACC domain, with the microtubule/centrosomal proteins of the stu2/msps/ch-TOG family [5,6,22-24], and with the Aurora kinases [20,21,25]. These interactions are required for the accumulation of the D-TACC, spc72, ceTAC1 and TACC3 proteins to the centrosome [5,6,22-24]. Hence, this functional interaction with the centrosome and mitotic spindle is likely to represent the ancient, conserved function of the TACC family. However, it is apparent that the human TACC proteins also differ in their ability to interact with the Aurora kinases. For instance, TACC1 and TACC3 interact with Aurora A kinase, whereas TACC2 interacts with Aurora C kinase [21], suggesting a degree of functional specialization in the derivatives of the ancestral chordate TACC, after the radiation of the vertebrate TACC genes.

The localization of the vertebrate TACC proteins in the interphase nucleus [15,26,27] suggests that they have additional functions outside their ancient role in the centrosome and microtubule dynamics. Thus, it seems likely that TACC family members in protostomes and deuterostomes have integrated new unique functions as the evolving TACC genes acquired additional exons. The results of the pilot large-scale proteomic analysis in C. elegans and D. melanogaster provide further suggestive evidence to this functional evolution. Yeast two hybrid analysis indicates that ceTAC directly binds to C. elegans lin15A, lin36 and lin37 [28]. These proteins bridge ceTAC to other elements of the cytoskeleton and microtubule network, as well as to components of the ribosome, the histone deacetylase chromatin remodeling machinery such as egr-1 and lin-53 (the C. elegans homologues of the human MTA-1 and RbAP48), and to transcription factors such as the PAL1 homeobox and the nuclear hormone receptor nhr-86 [28] (Fig. 6A). Similarly, large scale proteomics [29] has shown that Drosophila TACC interacts with two proteins, the RNA binding protein TBPH and CG14540 (Fig. 6B), and thus indirectly with the Drosophila SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex and DNA damage repair machinery. Significantly, the ceTAC protein has also recently been implicated in DNA repair through its direct interaction with the C. elegans BARD1 orthologue [30]. It should be noted that a number of interactions with the TACC proteins from these organisms have probably been missed by these large scale methods, including the well documented direct interactions with the aurora kinases and the stu2/msps/ch-TOG family.

Figure 6

Functional evolution of the TACC proteins modeled in C. elegans and D. melanogaster. (A). C. elegans interaction map shows empirically defined interactions of ceTAC, and extrapolated interactions defined by [28]. (B): Using the BIND database [29], DTACC directly binds to TBPH and CG14540, and thus indirectly to chromatin remodeling complexes (SWI/SNF and histone acetyltransferases), DNA damage repair machinery (via RAD23), and RNA splicing, transport and translational machinery. (C): Predicted interaction map for vertebrate TACCs, based upon ceTAC, suggests an indirect interaction with the nuclear hormone receptor RXRβ. It is also of interest that this predicts a functional interaction with the LDB family, members of which are also found in TACC containing paralogous segments noted in Figs 2, 3 and Additional file 1. (D): Predicted TACC interaction map based upon DTACC. (E): Vertebrate TACC interactions identified to date. ? denotes uncertainty over the identity of a functional vertebrate homologue. In C, D and E, '*' denotes one or more members of the TACC or Aurora kinase family.

Because of the evolutionary conservation of the TACC domain, we would predict that some of the functional interactions seen in C. elegans and D. melanogaster would be observed in higher animals. Phylogenetic profiling from these interaction maps suggests two similar sets of predicted interactions for vertebrate TACCs (Fig. 6C and 6D). Strikingly, however, the C. elegans specific proteins lin15A, lin36 and lin37 do not have readily discernible homologues in vertebrates or Drosophila, although the presence of a zinc finger domain in lin36 may suggest that this protein is involved directly in transcription or perform an adaptor role similar to LIM containing proteins. For the DTACC interacting proteins, TBPH corresponds to TDP43, a protein implicated in transcriptional regulation and splicing [31,32]. However, the assignment of the human homologue of CG14540 is less clear, with the closest matches in the human databases corresponding to glutamine rich transcription factors such as CREB and the G-box binding factor.

Comparison of modeled with experimentally defined interactions of the vertebrate TACC proteins

The interaction data for the vertebrate TACCs is relatively limited; however, interaction networks are now beginning to emerge. The results of our functional analysis, as well as other published data clearly indicate that the vertebrate TACCs interact with proteins that can be divided into two broad categories: 1) proteins with roles in centrosome/mitotic spindle dynamics, and 2) proteins involved in gene regulation, either at the level of transcription, or subsequent RNA processing and translation [3,5-7,15,19-21,24,25,33,34]. Many of these proteins do not appear to interact directly with the protostome TACCs, but would be expected to be in the same protein complex (Fig. 6C,6D).

Significant analysis of the association of the TACCs with the centrosome and the dynamics of mitotic spindle assembly from yeast to humans has been published [5,6,21-24]. From this analysis, it seems likely that the vertebrate TACC3 protein has retained this direct ancestral function, based upon its location in these structures during mitosis [27], its strong interaction with Aurora Kinase A, and the observation that it is the only human TACC protein phosphorylated by this enzyme [21]. However, the variability of the central domain of the vertebrate orthologues, suggests that TACC3 may also have acquired additional, and in some instances, species-specific functions. For instance, in X. laevis, the maskin protein has acquired a binding site for the eIF4E protein, and thus a function in the coordinated control of polyadenylation and translation in the Xenopus oocyte [8,35]. A recent study has suggested that this function may be unique to maskin: although it is unclear whether the other vertebrate TACC3 proteins interact with the eIF4E/CPEB complex, the human TACC1A isoform is unable to interact with the eIF4E/CPEB complex. Instead, some TACC1 isoforms have evolved a related, but distinct function by directly interacting with elements of the RNA splicing and transport machinery [19].

To further characterize the evolving functions of the TACC proteins, we have used an unbiased yeast two hybrid screening method to identify proteins that bind to the human TACC proteins [3,34]. In a screen of a MATCHMAKER fetal brain library (BD Biosciences Clontech), in addition to isolating the histone acetyltransferase hGCN5L2 [34], we also identified the β3 isoform of retinoid-X receptor β as a protein that interacts with the TACC domain of TACC2. As shown in Fig. 7, this interaction is confirmed in vitro by GST-pull down analysis. Significantly, RXRβ is a close family relative of the nuclear hormone receptor, nhr-86, from C. elegans, which interacts with the ceTAC binding protein lin36 (Fig. 6A). This suggests that while protostome TACCs may require additional protein factors to interact with such components, the TACCs in higher organisms may have evolved the ability to directly interact with some of the proteins in the predicted interaction map (Fig. 6E). Indeed, this appears to be directly linked to the acquisition of new domains and duplication of the chordate TACC precursor. In fact, the first identified function of a vertebrate TACC protein was as a transcriptional coactivator acting through a direct interaction with the ARNT transcription factor [7]. It is also intriguing that the deuterostome specific SDP repeat interacts with GAS41, a component/accessory factor of the human SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex [3,15]. Although there is a D. melanogaster homologue of GAS41, dmGAS41, the large scale proteomic interaction database does not indicate a direct interaction of dmGAS41 with DTACC. This may be due to the lack of the SDP repeat region in the Drosophila TACC protein. This further suggests that the vertebrate TACCs have gained the specific ability to direct interact with transcriptional regulatory complexes, and that bridging protein(s) are no longer required. Thus, where the ceTAC protein is only composed of the TACC domain, the significantly larger TACC family members in higher protostomes and deuterostomes may have integrated one or more functions of the bridging protein (in this case lin15A, lin36 or lin37). This may also explain the absence of lin15A, lin36 and lin37 homologues in higher organisms, as they were no longer under selective evolutionary pressure to remain within the complex, and thus lost in the evolving genome.

Figure 7

In vitro interaction of RXRβ3 and TACC2s. Top panel: Autoradiograph of 12% SDS polyacrylamide gel with in vitro translated RXRβ3 construct pulled down with GST-TACC2 (Lane 1) or GST (Lane 2); Lane 3: 5% input of in vitro translated RXR-β protein. Bottom two panels represent Coomassie blue stained gels of pull down experiment showing loading of GST-TACC2 and GST.

Conclusion

Proposed functional evolution of the TACC family

Examination of the evolution of ancient gene families provides an insight into how gene structure relates to function. We have presented above, a detailed examination of one such gene family. The data so far suggest that the functional TACC homologue in yeast (spc72) has a specific role in centrosomal/mitotic spindle dynamics [21,22]. This ancient TACC function is conserved throughout evolution in both protostomes and deuterostomes. In addition, the TACC proteins of lower organisms appear to interact with bridging proteins that are components of several different protein complexes involved in DNA damage repair, protein translation, RNA processing and transcription. However, over the process of evolutionary time, with the acquisition of new domains and duplication of the chordate TACC precursor, the chordate TACC proteins have acquired the ability to directly interact with some of the other components of these complexes (such as the LSm proteins, nuclear hormone receptors, GAS41, accessory proteins and transcription factors), and thus evolved additional functions within these complexes. Indeed, the first assigned function of a vertebrate TACC protein, mouse TACC3, was as a transcriptional coactivator of the ARNT mediated transcriptional response to hypoxia and polyaromatic hydrocarbons [7]. Mouse TACC3 has also been reported to interact with the transcription factor STAT5 [33]. Recently, we have demonstrated that TACC2 and TACC3 can bind to nuclear histone acetyltransferases [34], further confirming a more direct role for the TACC proteins in transcriptional and chromatin remodeling events. Interestingly although all human TACC proteins can directly interact with the histone acetyltransferase pCAF in vitro, the TACC1 isoforms expressed in human breast cancer cells do not interact with this histone acetylase [34]. This may be attributable to the proposed function of the Exon 1 containing TACC1 variants in RNA processing, via the interaction with LSm-7 and SmG [19]. Thus, alternative splicing of the TACC1 gene adds further diversity to TACC1 function, as the deletion of specific exons and their associated binding domains will change the potential protein complexes with which they can associate, either directly, or by redirecting the splice variants to different subcellular compartments. With the duplication of the TACC1/TACC2 ancestor, it is apparent that an even greater functional diversity may have been introduced into the TACC family. The TACC2 protein retains the ability of TACC3 to interact with GAS41, INI1, histone acetyltransferases and transcription factors (in this case, RXRβ) (Fig. 7) [3,34]. However, the tissue specific splicing of the 5 kb exon in the TACC2l isoform [3] indicates that this protein has several temporal and tissue specific functions yet to be identified.

Methods

Compilation and assembly of previously uncharacterized TACC cDNAs and genes

Corresponding orthologous sequences for TACC, RHAMM, KLP, KIF, TPM and keratins families were identified initially using the TBLASTN program [36] to search the published genomic and cDNA databases. For Takifugu rubripes, gene predictions were produced by the Ensembl automated pipeline [37] and the JGI blast server . DNA sequences covering the homology regions were extracted and analyzed by Genscan to obtain potential exons. In some cases, exons were added or modified based on the best similarity of translated peptides to the corresponding mouse and human proteins. For regions with low sequence similarity, genomic sequences  from the fresh water pufferfish, Tetraodon nigroviridis were used as additional means to verify the predicted exons. Due to the variability of the central region of vertebrate TACC3 cDNAs (see text), to further confirm prediction of the Takifugu rubripes TACC3, full length cDNAs corresponding to the Danio rerio TACC3 (IMAGE clones 2639991, 2640369 and 3724452) were also obtained from A.T.C.C. and fully sequenced. Potential paralogous chromosomal segments and scaffold were identified by searching the public databases deposited at NCBI and at the Human Genome Mapping Project, Cambridge UK.

Cloning of vertebrate TACC cDNAs

The rabbit TACC3 was cloned by rt-PCR using the "TACC4" specific primer T4RACE2 [9] (5'-cccgaactgctccaggtaatcgatctc-3') and a consensus primer, T3con2, designed to the region encompassing the vertebrate TACC3 initiator methionine (5'-tatgagtctgcaggtcttaaacgac-3'). For cloning the mouse Tacc1X cDNA, the primers used were based upon the genomic sequence reported, and the sequence of the IMAGE cDNA clone 4933429K08: T1XF (5'-ccatgttcagtcattggcaggtc-3'), T1XF2 (5'-ctgcagaaccaacagttcaag-3'), T1XR1 (5'-agatctgtgacatcacagctc-3'), T1XR2 (5'-ctcgagtcagttagtcttatccagctt-3'), BB617F (5'-accaccaacttgagtacctg-3') and BB617R (5'-gtatcttgaactgttggttctg-3'). For analysis of TACC1 splice variants, the forward primers used were located in exon 1b: EF (5'-gagagatgcgaaatcagcg-3'), Exon 1d: X3F (5'-agtcaaagaaggcatctgcag-3'), Exon 1a: 1DF (5'-ccaagttctgcgccatggg-3'). The reverse primers used were: Exon 1: X1R (5'-ggatttggtctcggcttgcgaatc-3'), Exon 2: BX647R (5'-cttgtgattcttggcttttgg-3'), Exon 3: 6SPR (5'-gtcatcgcctcgtcctggagggc-3'), Exon 4a: 1DR (5'-aatttcacttgttcagtagtc-3'), Exon 5: 128R (5'-cctgcttctgaggatgaaaacgc-3'). Rabbit brain poly A+ mRNA, mouse testis and human brain total RNA were obtained from BD Bioscience Clontech (Palo Alto, CA, U.S.A.). Reverse transcription and PCR was performed as previously described, using either 1 μg of total RNA or 50 ng of poly A+ mRNA as template for first strand cDNA synthesis. PCR products were cloned into pCR2.1 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA, U.S.A.) and transformed into InvαF' competent cells. Plasmid inserts were sequenced by the Roswell Park Cancer Institute Biopolymer Core Facility.

Deposition of nucleotide sequences

Sequences from this article have been deposited in the GenBank database with the following accession numbers: Homo sapiens TACC1 short isoform S (AY177411), Mus musculus TACC1 short isoform S (AY177412), Mus musculus TACC1 long isoform A (AY177413), Mus musculus TACC2s (AY177410), Oryctolagus cuniculus TACC3 (AY161270), Danio rerio TACC3 (AY170618). Annotations submitted to the Third party annotation database at NCBI are as follows: Rattus norvegus TACC1 long isoform A (BK001653), Takifugu rubripes TACC1A (BK000666/BK000667), Takifugu rubripes TACC1B (BK000664), Mus musculus TACC2l (BK001495), Rattus norvegus TACC2l (BK001658), Rattus norvegus TACC2s (BK001657), Takifugu rubripes TACC2l (BK000690), Rattus norvegus TACC3 (BK001491), Gallus gallus TACC3 (BK001482), Silurana tropicalis TACC3 (BK001481),Takifugu rubripes TACC3 (BK000649), Takifugu rubripes RHAMM (BK000676), Ciona intestinalis RHAMM (BK001479), Takifugu rubripes Keratin (BK000677), Takifugu rubripes TPM1 (BAC10576), Ciona intestinalis Kif3b (BK001492), Ciona intestinalis klp2 (BK001493).

Phylogenetic analysis

In order to examine evolutionary relationships of proteins containing coiled coil domains, protein sequences representing the major members of this super family, including TACC, RHAMM, KLP, keratin and tropomyosin from available vertebrates and their recognizable orthologues from the urochordate Ciona intestinalis, Drosophila melanogaster, C. elegans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae were either directly retrieved from NCBI sequence databases, newly predicted or isolated (see above). Species abbreviations are as follows: hs (Homo sapiens), mm (Mus musculus), rn (Rattus norvegus), oc (Oryctolagus cuniculus), gg (Gallus gallus), xl (Xenopus laevis), st (Silurana tropicalis), tr (Takifugu rubripes), dr (Danio rerio), ci (Ciona intestinalis), dm (D. melanogaster), ce (C. elegans), sc (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). The sequences identified above and the following protein or predicted translations were used for phylogenetic analysis: hsTACC1A (NP_006274), hsTACC2l (AAO62630) hsTACC2s (AAO62629), hsTACC3 (NP_006333), mmTACC3 (Q9JJ11), xlMaskin (Q9PTG8), dmTACC (AAF52099), ceTAC1 (NP_497059), scSPC72 (NP_009352), hsRHAMM (NP_036616), mmRHAMM (NP_038580), rnRHAMM (NP_037096), drRHAMM (AAQ97980), hsKeratin (CAB76828), mmKeratin (A61368), rnKeratin (XP_235679), hsTPM1 (NP_000357), mmTPM1 (NP_077745), rnTPM1 (NP_62004, drTPM1 (NP_571180) dmTPM1 (P06754), ceTPM (NP_493540) scTPM1 (P17536), hsKLP2 (BAB03309), rnKIF15 (AAP44513), xlKLP2 (CAA08879), dmKLP2 (NP_476818), ceKLP18 (AA034669), hsKIF3A (Q9Y496), mmKIF3A (NP_032469), rnKIF3A (XP_340797), xlKIF3A (CAA08879), ceKLP11 (NP_741473), ciKIF3 (ci0100148992), hsKIF3B (NP_004789), mmKIF3B (NP_004789), rnKIF3B (XP_215883), dmKIF3B (NP_524029), hsKIF3C (NP_002245), mmKIF3C (NP_032471), rnKIF3C (NP_445938), dmKIF3C (NP_651939).

These protein sequences were initially aligned with CLUSTAL X [38]. Minor adjustments to certain regions of the alignment for optimization purposes were made based on pairwise alignments, the output saved in PHYLIP format, after which, the distances between proteins were calculated using Poisson correction and the Unrooted trees were inferred with the NJ method and then displayed using TreeView [39]. Bootstrap values above 700 for 1000 trials are shown at the node. To validate the tree, the same sequence set was analyzed with tools in the PHYLIP package [40], using PRODIST followed by FITCH or NEIGNBOR and tree displaying using TreeView. This additional method produced trees with essentially the same topology (data not shown).

In vitro interaction of TACC2 and RXRβ3

The TACC2 cDNA was cloned into GST fusion vector pGEX5X2 (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA). GST and GST-TACC2 proteins were expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3) plys "S" with 1 mM IPTG at 37°C shaker for 2 hrs. Cells (50 ml) were harvested and resuspended in 5 ml of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH.8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA pH8.0, Protease inhibitor set III (Calbiochem). The cells were lysed by sonication and lysate cleared by centrifugation at 7500 rpm at 4°C for 15 min. The cleared lysate was immobilized on glutathione sepharose beads in 3 ml of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH.8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA pH8.0). RXRβ3 cDNA was cloned into pET 28C(+) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and protein synthesized by TNT quick coupled transcription/translation system kit (Promega) and radiolabeled with 35S methionine according to manufacturer's instructions. 100 μl of in vitro translated RXRβ3 protein in 1 ml of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH.8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA pH8.0 was incubated at 4°C with immobilized GST-TACC2 or GST for 90 min. Unbound RXRβ3 was removed by washing three times with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH.8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA pH8.0. Bound proteins were eluted from the beads at room temperature for 10 min in elution buffer (100 mM Tris HCl, pH8.0, 20 mM reduced glutathione). The proteins were analyzed on 12% SDS polyacrylamide gels. Coomassie blue staining verified equal loading of GST fusion protein. Dried gels were autoradiographed.

Authors' contributions

I.H.S performed most of the sequence analysis and drafted the assembly of the TACC, KLP, KIF and RHAMM sequences. I.H.S. performed the cDNA isolation of the rabbit TACC3 cDNA. AK identified potential TACC1 splice variants, and the interaction between RXRβ3 and TACC2. A.M. characterized mouse TACC orthologues. P.L. performed the identification and assembly of T. rubripes gene sequences, and the phylogenetic analysis. I.H.S. conceived and designed the project and drafted the complete manuscript.

Supplementary Material

Additional file 1

Location of paralogous genes found on human 4p16, 5q31-ter, 10q23-ter, 8p and chromosome 2. Positions of genes are given in Mb from the telomere of the short arm of the chromosome.

Blue highlighted genes (five copies) are found in all four paralogous segments, and the partially duplicated segment on chromosome 2.

Green highlighted genes are found in either all four paralogous segments, or three of the segments and the partially duplicated region on chromosome 2.

Pink highlighted genes have paralogues in three of the segments, suggesting either loss of the fourth copy or exclusion of one paralogue from the second round of duplication.

Black highlighted genes (two paralogues) are found in only one of the derivatives of the second round of genome duplication, suggesting complete exclusion of both copies from the second round of duplication.

Purple highlighted genes (two paralogues) were duplicated at the second round of genome duplication, or from interchromosomal recombination between paralogous clusters.

Click here for file

Acknowledgements

We wish to thank Dr. Sei-ichi Matsui for his assistance and input in the preparation of this manuscript. This work was supported in part by developmental funds support from the Roswell Park Cancer Institute, and Core grant 2P30CA016056-27 from the National Cancer Institute.The Zebrafish moonshine Gene Encodes Transcriptional Intermediary Factor 1γ, an Essential Regulator of Hematopoiesis

Abstract

Hematopoiesis is precisely orchestrated by lineage-specific DNA-binding proteins that regulate transcription in concert with coactivators and corepressors. Mutations in the zebrafish moonshine (mon) gene specifically disrupt both embryonic and adult hematopoiesis, resulting in severe red blood cell aplasia. We report that mon encodes the zebrafish ortholog of mammalian transcriptional intermediary factor 1γ (TIF1γ) (or TRIM33), a member of the TIF1 family of coactivators and corepressors. During development, hematopoietic progenitor cells in mon mutants fail to express normal levels of hematopoietic transcription factors, including gata1, and undergo apoptosis. Three different mon mutant alleles each encode premature stop codons, and enforced expression of wild-type tif1γ mRNA rescues embryonic hematopoiesis in homozygous mon mutants. Surprisingly, a high level of zygotic tif1γ mRNA expression delineates ventral mesoderm during hematopoietic stem cell and progenitor formation prior to gata1 expression. Transplantation studies reveal that tif1γ functions in a cell-autonomous manner during the differentiation of erythroid precursors. Studies in murine erythroid cell lines demonstrate that Tif1γ protein is localized within novel nuclear foci, and expression decreases during erythroid cell maturation. Our results establish a major role for this transcriptional intermediary factor in the differentiation of hematopoietic cells in vertebrates.

Introduction

Hematopoiesis involves the coordinated processes of cell proliferation and differentiation of a relatively small number of progenitor cells into billions of circulating red and white blood cells (Thisse and Zon 2002). Hematopoiesis in vertebrates, from zebrafish to humans, is an evolutionarily conserved program that produces two waves of stem or progenitor cells that differ both in their embryonic origins and in the lineages of differentiated blood cells produced (Palis and Yoder 2001; Orkin and Zon 2002; Galloway and Zon 2003). The first, or primitive, wave of hematopoiesis originates from ventral mesoderm and gives rise to progenitor cells that differentiate in embryonic blood islands. The primitive wave of hematopoiesis produces a burst of embryonic erythrocytes and macrophages. The second, or definitive, wave of hematopoiesis arises from self-renewing stem cells that develop primarily in the intraembryonic aorta–gonad–mesonephros region. These definitive hematopoietic stem cells seed the later developing marrow spaces, to produce all lineages of adult blood cells, including definitive erythrocytes, myeloid cells, and lymphocytes.

We have undertaken a genetic approach to characterize genes that control hematopoiesis using the zebrafish as a model system (Thisse and Zon 2002). As part of a large-scale forward genetic screen, we previously identified bloodless zebrafish mutants that failed to express the erythroid transcription factor gata1 normally in embryonic hematopoietic precursors (Ransom et al. 1996). We named one of these zebrafish genes moonshine (mon), and another group named a noncomplementing allele vampire (Weinstein et al. 1996).

Here, we have determined that mutations in the mon gene cause a disruption in both primitive embryonic and definitive adult hematopoiesis, resulting in a severe loss of erythroid cells. Erythroid progenitor cells in mon mutants are initially present, but fail to express normal levels of hematopoietic transcription factors and undergo apoptosis.

Positional cloning identifies the mon gene as the zebrafish ortholog of mammalian transcriptional intermediary factor 1γ (TIF1γ), a member of the TIF1 family of transcriptional coactivators and corepressors (Le Douarin et al. 1995; Friedman et al. 1996; Kim et al. 1996; Venturini et al. 1999; Peng et al. 2002). The three members of the vertebrate TIF1 family (α, β, and γ) are large nuclear proteins that each contain an N-terminal RBCC or TRIM domain (Reymond et al. 2001) composed of a RING finger, two B-boxes, and a coiled-coil domain. TIF1 family members also contain a C-terminal plant homeodomain finger and bromodomain that are characteristic of chromatin remodeling factors. TIF1α has been shown to associate with a variety of ligand-bound nuclear hormone receptors (Le Douarin et al. 1995) and function as a coactivator for retinoic acid receptors (Zhong et al.1999). TIF1β has been shown to act as a corepressor for the large family of Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) domain zinc-finger transcription factors (Friedman et al. 1996; Abrink et al. 2001). In contrast, TIF1γ does not associate directly with either nuclear receptors or KRAB domains that bind to the other TIF1 family members (Venturini et al. 1999; Abrink et al. 2001). Biochemical studies also demonstrate that TIF1γ forms both homo-oligomers and hetero-oligomers with TIF1α but not with TIF1β (Peng et al. 2002). The murine Tif1α and Tif1γ genes have not yet been subjected to gene targeting experiments, whereas analysis of mouse mutants demonstrates that Tif1β is required for postimplantation embryogenesis and mesoderm induction in particular (Cammas et al. 2000). Taken together, these studies suggest that a major function of TIF1 family members is to link DNA-binding proteins with other coactivators or corepressors during development.

Our studies establish that tif1γ functions as an essential regulator of embryonic and adult hematopoiesis in vertebrates. Cell transplantation studies demonstrate that tif1γ acts in a cell-autonomous manner during embryonic hematopoiesis. The tif1γ gene is expressed specifically in ventral mesoderm and hematopoietic progenitors, then downregulated as erythroid maturation occurs. Tif1γ protein localizes to a novel class of nuclear bodies in both primary mouse embryo fibroblasts and erythroleukemia cell lines. Taken together, our studies demonstrate that Tif1γ is required for normal erythroid cell development and survival.

Results

The Zebrafish mon Gene Is Essential for Both Primitive and Definitive Erythropoiesis

In order to determine when the mon gene is required in development, we first examined hematopoietic gene expression and apoptosis in zebrafish homozygous mon mutant embryos. During embryogenesis, homozygous zebrafish mon mutants have no red blood cells (RBCs) visible in circulation (Ransom et al. 1996; Weinstein et al. 1996). The mon mutants initiate expression of gata1 in hematopoietic cells around the five-somite stage, similar to wild-type embryos (data not shown); however, based on TUNEL staining, the differentiating erythroid cells undergo programmed cell death from the 12-somite stage to 22 h postfertilization (hpf) (Figure 1A and 1B, arrows). At 12 somites, gata1 expression is only slightly reduced. By 18–22 hpf, hematopoietic-specific markers such as gata1, scl, gata2, and ikaros are not detected in the embryonic blood island (Figure 1A and 1B; unpublished data). The hematopoietic cells are thus correctly specified early during the development of mon mutant embryos, but these precursors undergo cell death. Based on expression of c-myb and rag1 (Figure 1B, arrows), mon mutants have normal myeloid and lymphoid development, respectively. In addition to the deficit of RBCs in mon mutants, there is a prominent loss of fin-fold and tail mesenchyme (Ransom et al. 1996). TUNEL staining of mon mutants demonstrates extensive apoptosis of mesenchymal cells in the trunk and tail bud regions (Figure 1A and 1B, arrows). The mon gene is thus required for normal development and survival of both committed erythroid progenitor cells and posterior mesenchymal cells.

We next examined definitive hematopoiesis in rare surviving homozygous adult zebrafish mon mutants. Mutations in mon are generally lethal by 10 to 14 d of development (Ransom et al. 1996), although rare mon homozygous mutants (approximately 1 in 500 bloodless embryos) of all tested alleles survive to adulthood. Adult mon mutants show cardiac hypertrophy, presumably due to the severe anemia leading to a high output state (Figure 2). In wild-type zebrafish, the adult site of hematopoiesis is the kidney (Al Adhami and Kunz 1977), which contains erythroid, lymphoid, and myeloid populations at various stages of differentiation (Bennett et al. 2001). In mon homozygous mutants, there is a severe block in maturation at the proerythroblast stage (Figure 2), whereas the differentiation of myeloid cells is normal (unpublished data). This demonstrates that the mon gene product acts during both primitive and definitive erythropoiesis.

Positional Cloning Identifies mon as the Zebrafish Ortholog of Mammalian TIF1γ

We identified the mon gene by positional cloning using a panel of 2,200 diploid mutants collected from Tübingen background (TU)/WIK strain hybrid parents carrying the montg234 allele. The mon mutant gene was positioned on Chromosome 8 between microsatellite markers z987 and z11001 (Figure 3A) (Knapik et al. 1998). For positional cloning purposes, over 12,000 polymorphic markers were screened using amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) (Ransom and Zon 1999), and 36 markers within the interval were isolated. One of these, MA3, was found to be 0.3 cM from the gene (Figure 3A) and was utilized as the starting point of a chromosomal walk. A critical P1 bacterial artificial chromosome clone (PAC), 107N19, was obtained that spanned the genetic interval. Two simple sequence conformation polymorphism (SSCP) markers found on this PAC clone flank the critical genetic interval. The marker 80M12-T7 maps two recombinants out of 4,400 meioses telomeric of the mutation, and the marker 157J23-T7 maps one recombinant centromic of the mutation (Figure 3A). The end sequences and SSCP markers of PAC 107N19 are found in the zebrafish genomic sequence contig ctg23107 (http://www.ensembl.org/Danio_rerio/) containing a predicted zebrafish TIF1 family gene. This PAC was hybridized to a kidney cDNA library, resulting in the isolation of four clones that represented the same gene.

The mon gene encodes a member of the TIF1 family of transcriptional cofactors (Figure 3B and 3C). The coding sequence of mon is most similar to human TIFγ (Le Douarin et al. 1995; Friedman et al. 1996; Venturini et al. 1999), and the locations of exon boundaries are conserved between the zebrafish and human genes (unpublished data). The mon locus on zebrafish Chromosome 8 is also predicted to be syntenic to the region of human Chromosome 1p that contains the TIF1γ gene based on the conserved locations of 12 other orthologous gene pairs, including NRAS, mapped to these regions in human and zebrafish (Barbazuk et al. 2000). Therefore, based on sequence similarity and chromosomal location, the zebrafish mon gene is the likely ortholog of the human TIF1γ gene.

We have identified ethyl-nitrosourea (ENU)-induced point mutations in three alleles of mon (Figure 3C and 3D), each of which generates a premature stop codon. The montb222b and montg234 alleles have a severe phenotype with no circulating blood cells. In contrast, the monm262 allele has 10–100 circulating blood cells by 48 hpf, in comparison to the approximately 3,000 RBCs in the circulation of wild-type or heterozygous embryos at the same time point. The monm262 allele was found to encode a premature stop codon at position E40, which would encode a putative protein of only 40 amino acids. Although this mutation would be expected to lead to a complete loss of mon gene product, another methionine is found downstream at amino acid position 104. In vitro translation experiments in reticulocyte lysates demonstrate reinitiation of translation from this methionine (unpublished data). Therefore, the hypomorphic larval phenotype of the monm262 allele is likely due to partial loss of mon function or expression. The presence of mutations in each of the mon alleles indicates that defective Tif1γ function is the cause of the mon phenotype.

In order to determine whether tif1γ is expressed in hematopoietic mesoderm, we next examined zebrafish embryos by whole-mount in situ hybridization (Figure 4A). tif1γ mRNA is expressed maternally and is found throughout the embryo during blastula stages. During gastrulation and epiboly stages, zygotic expression of mon is highest in the mesendoderm of the germ ring. At tail bud and early somite stages a high level of tif1γ expression delineates a horseshoe-shaped population of ventral/lateral mesoderm that will give rise to blood and also expresses stem cell leukemiahematopoietic transcription factor (scl) (Liao et al. 1997). This group of cells continues to express tif1γ and scl while it converges and forms the embryonic blood island (Detrich et al. 1995). The tif1γ gene is also highly expressed in the central nervous system as well as the mesenchyme of the trunk and tail. Homozygous montg234 mutants have a greatly reduced amount of tif1γ mRNA in all tissues consistent with nonsense-mediated message decay. Thus, zebrafish tif1γ is specifically expressed in ventral mesoderm and putative hemangioblasts prior to and during the embryonic stages when hematopoietic progenitors are undergoing apoptosis in mon mutants. We also compared the expression of zebrafish mon to mouse Tif1γ (Figure 4A and 4B). Mouse Tif1γ is highly expressed in erythroid blood islands of the yolk sac, and it is subsequently expressed in the fetal liver at a high level, and in other tissues, including the central nervous system. Taken together these results strongly suggest that zebrafish mon and mouse Tif1γ are orthologs that function during hematopoiesis.

Given that mammalian TIF1γ has been shown to form hetero-oligomers with Tif1α (Peng et al. 2002), we searched for additional TIF1 family members in zebrafish to compare with tif1γ. Using zebrafish expressed sequence tag (EST) sequences, we designed primers to RT-PCR amplify a TIF1-related cDNA from embryonic 10-hpf and 24-hpf RNA. This cDNA encodes a predicted zebrafish ortholog of human TIF1α based on predicted amino acid sequences (see Figure 3B). In addition, zebrafish tif1α ESTs map to LG4 in a region predicted to be syntenic to the region of human Chromosome 7 that contains the TIF1α gene based on the conserved locations of eight other orthologous gene pairs, including SEMA3A, mapped to these regions in human and zebrafish (Barbazuk et al. 2000). We next compared the embryonic expression pattern of tif1α mRNA to tif1γ by in situ hybridization. Like mammalian TIF1α (Le Douarin et al. 1995; Niederreither et al. 1999), the predicted zebrafish tif1γ gene is broadly expressed (see Figure 4A). At five somites, zebrafish tif1α does not display the relatively high expression in the horseshoe-shaped region of hematopoietic mesoderm seen with tif1γ. At later stages, tif1α is evenly expressed throughout most of the embryo, including the developing blood islands. Therefore, tif1α is coexpressed in the same cells with tif1γ and may therefore be available to form hetero-oligomers in vivo.

Forced Expression of tif1γ Rescues Hematopoiesis in mon Mutants

To further confirm that a mutation in the zebrafish tif1γ gene is responsible for the mon mutant phenotype we performed embryo rescue experiments (Figure 5A; Table 1). Microinjection of synthetic wild-type mon mRNA at the one-cell stage rescues the formation of embryonic erythrocytes in genotyped mutant embryos without causing obvious defects in embryonic patterning or organogenesis. At 4 d of development, 70% (n = 10) of montg234 mutants show significant (greater than 200 cells in comparison to a wild-type estimate of 3,000 cells) rescue of circulating hemoglobinized RBCs in comparison to control sibling mutants (n = 75). Based on the correction of the jagged fin-fold phenotype (Ransom et al. 1996), the mesenchymal cells are rescued to a similar extent as the anemia (unpublished data). Overexpression of mon did not result in expanded blood cell numbers in wild-type embryos and was not toxic at doses that rescue the phenotype of mon mutants (unpublished data). Since there were no expanded or ectopic blood populations in the embryos, these rescue experiments suggest that mon functions as a permissive factor required for hematopoiesis.

Marrow Transplantation Rescues Erythropoiesis in mon Mutants

The high levels of tif1γ expression in erythroid cells suggest that it functions as a cell-autonomous regulator of gene expression in hematopoietic cells. In order to test this hypothesis, we transplanted wild-type adult zebrafish kidney marrow cells carrying a gata1:green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgene into 48-hpf mon mutant embryos (Figure 5B; Table 2). The gata1:GFP transgene makes use of the gata1 promoter to drive GFP expression and can thus be used to mark donor-derived erythroid cells (Long et al. 1997). Untransplanted mutant embryos have no embryonic blood cells in circulation. Following transplantation, mutant host embryos were observed daily for 2 wk. Of 191 mutant embryos injected, 129 (68%) showed GFP+ cells in circulation 2 d later. Many recipients showed robust increases in donor-derived cells over the observation period. Of 81 recipients initially scored as having less than ten GFP+ cells at day 2 posttransplant, 13 (16%) of these demonstrated a marked increase in erythroid cells with 100–1,000 GFP+ cells in circulation 6 d later. By day 10, these transplanted embryos showed approximately 3,000 cells in circulation, similar to the number of blood cells in normal embryos. Despite robust reconstitution of blood cells, mutant recipients did not inflate their swim bladders and thus failed to survive longer than nontransplanted sibling controls, all dying by 3 wk of age. In contrast, 13/35 (37%) heterozygous montg234 transplants survived to early adulthood. Similar transplants of wild-type cells can fully rescue vlad tepes (gata1) mutants (Traver et al. 2003). Therefore, the results of cell transplantations suggests that tif1γ plays a cell-autonomous role in erythroid cells, and its role in nonhematopoietic tissues, such as trunk mesenchyme or the nervous system, is also required for embryo survival.

Tif1γ in Punctate Nuclear Foci Is Developmentally Regulated

In order to examine the subcellular distribution of Tif1γ protein, we generated an affinity-purified rabbit polyclonal antiserum directed against the C-terminal 15 amino acids conserved in human TIF1γ and mouse Tif1γ. Immunofluorescence of mouse embryo fibroblast nuclei with the anti-Tif1γ antiserum demonstrates that Tif1γ is localized in small nuclear foci (Figure 6A). The localization of Tif1γ protein appears different from the more diffuse nuclear patterns typically seen in studies of Tif1α (Remboutsika et al. 2002) or TIF1β (Cammas et al. 2002). A recent report demonstrates that TIF1β associates with heterochromatin-containing foci after retinoic acid treatment or serum starvation (Cammas et al. 2002). Thus, localization or expression of the TIF1 proteins may be regulated during distinct developmental processes or by environmental cues. The nuclear foci that contain Tif1γ do not colocalize with two markers of heterochromatin, HP1α protein and DAPI staining of DNA (Figure 6A). Furthermore, Tif1γ does not colocalize with promyelocytic leukemia gene product (PML) nuclear bodies, DNA repair complexes that contain Mre11, or transcriptional complexes containing TFII-B (unpublished data). We next examined the expression of Tif1γ protein during the differentiation of G1E cells, a murine erythroleukemia cell line that can terminally differentiate into erythrocytes when a Gata1:estrogen receptor fusion protein is stabilized in response to estrogen exposure (Weiss et al. 1997). Western blot analysis demonstrated that Tif1γ protein expression decreases with terminal erythroid differentiation (Figure 6B). Consistent with this finding, after 24 hpf, zebrafish mon mRNA expression falls during the terminal maturation of the primitive erythroid cells (unpublished data). In two different murine erythroleukemia cell lines (MEL and G1E), Tif1γ is also expressed in nuclear foci, and even though the overall Tif1γ protein level is reduced, this nuclear foci localization does not change with differentiation (unpublished data). This provides further support for the hypothesis that Tif1γ acts within novel nuclear foci, during erythroid differentiation.

Discussion

The zebrafish is an excellent model system to elucidate the molecular machinery controlling gene expression during hematopoiesis (Thisse and Zon 2002; Galloway and Zon 2003). As part of a large-scale forward genetic screen, we originally identified a complementation group of independent mutant alleles in the zebrafish gene that we named moonshine (Ransom et al. 1996). Positional cloning was used to identify the mon gene, establishing a critical role for a transcriptional intermediary factor, Tif1γ, during hematopoietic development.

The mon Gene Encodes the Zebrafish Ortholog of Mammalian TIF1γ

Our results strongly support the conclusion that we have positionally cloned the zebrafish mon gene correctly, and it is the ortholog of mammalian Tif1γ. Tif1γ is present in the critical genetic interval encompassing a single approximately 50-kb PAC clone defined by linkage analysis (see Figure 3). Sequence analysis indicates that zebrafish tif1γ is most similar in predicted amino acid sequence and intron/exon structure compared to the predicted orthologous human and mouse genes. Zebrafish tif1γ is located in a region of zebrafish Chromosome 8 syntenic to the region of human Chromosome 1 containing TIF1γ. We identified point mutations in tif1γ from three different alleles of mon that each result in premature stop codons and mRNA decay. In addition, tif1γ/Tif1γ is highly expressed in hematopoietic cells throughout embryogenesis in both zebrafish and mouse (see Figure 4). And as predicted, forced expression of wild-type tif1γ mRNA efficiently rescues hematopoiesis in mon mutants and does not perturb hematopoiesis in wild-type embryos (see Figure 5). We have also cloned the predicted zebrafish ortholog of tif1α, which is more uniformly expressed in zebrafish embryos like mammalian TIF1α (Le Douarin et al. 1995; Niederreither et al. 1999) (see Figures 3A and 4A) and may therefore be available to form hetero-oligomers with Tif1γ protein in developing hematopoietic cells. Comparing available zebrafish and mammalian TIF1-predicted amino acid sequences, it appears that the Tif1γ orthologs are the most highly conserved family members while the Tif1α sequences are relatively more divergent. We have not found a Tif1β ortholog, thus far, in the zebrafish or fugu genome or EST sequences. It is possible that Tif1β, like the KRAB domain transcription factors it binds to, may be present only in tetrapods (Urrutia 2003). However, more complete genome sequences will be needed to confirm this hypothesis. Based on our analysis of zebrafish mon mutants, it is reasonable to predict that Tif1γ, the most evolutionarily conserved TIF1 family member, plays a similarly essential role in human and mouse hematopoiesis.

Mutations in tif1γ Cause Apoptosis of Erythroid Progenitors

Our examination of hematopoietic gene expression, apoptosis, and marrow histology in mon mutants demonstrates that early erythroid progenitors are formed in homozygous mutants, but they fail to properly differentiate and instead undergo programmed cell death (see Figure 1). The expression of gata1 appears to initiate normally in the committed erythroid cells of mon mutants. However, the cells are abnormal prior to the complete loss of gata1 expression. TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells are abundant by the 12-somite stage of development, and by 22 hpf all hematopoietic gene expression is extinguished. The expression of marker genes, including scl and gata2, characteristic of hematopoietic stem cells and primitive hematopoietic progenitors, are also not detected in the embryonic blood islands of mutants at 22 hpf. This indicates that the mutant hematopoietic cells are not blocked prior to commitment to the erythroid lineage, but instead develop as abnormal erythroid cells and undergo apoptosis, similar to gata1-deficient erythroid cells (Fujiwara et al. 1996; Lyons et al. 2002). Defective erythropoiesis and severe anemia were also observed in rare surviving homozygous mutant mon adults, demonstrating that tif1γ is also required in definitive hematopoiesis (see Figure 2).

The zygotic phenotypes of mon mutants may not reveal the function of maternally inherited Tif1γ. Maternally expressed zebrafish Tif1γ may play roles in hematopoiesis or other aspects of organogenesis that are not detectable due to the presence of wild-type mRNA in eggs laid by heterozygous mothers. Analysis of the offspring of homozygous mon mutant female zebrafish will aid in defining the function of this maternal mRNA. The present analysis of zygotic mon mutants provides data that are consistent with the conclusion that tif1γ is essential for erythropoiesis but do not rule out essential functions in other hematopoietic lineages.

The hematopoietic phenotype of mon mutants resembles the loss of erythroid cells seen in both mouse Gata1 knockout embryos and zebrafish vlad tepes (gata1) mutant embryos (Fujiwara et al. 1996; Lyons et al. 2002). In an effort to determine if there is a genetic relationship between mon and gata1, we tested their ability to rescue erythropoiesis. Both injection of gata1 mRNA into mon homozygous mutant embryos and injection of tif1γ mRNA into gata1 knock-down embryos failed to rescue hematopoiesis (unpublished data). We also tested for a direct interaction between Tif1γ and Gata1 proteins by coimmunoprecipitation and yeast two-hybrid assays and found no association (unpublished data). Although the mutations in each of these genes arrest cells at a similar stage of development, our results suggest that gata1 and tif1γ act independently. This does not rule out the possibility that parallel genetic pathways involving gata1 and tif1γ, operating together, regulate gene transcription within blood cells.

The Role of Tif1γ in Primitive and Definitive Erythropoiesis

Taken together, our data suggest that tif1γ is required as a permissive cofactor for the erythroid lineage-specific control of hematopoietic gene expression. We reasonably predict that Tif1γ protein functions as a transcriptional intermediary factor in hematopoietic progenitor cells given that both TIF1α (Zhong et al. 1999) and TIF1β (Friedman et al. 1996; Abrink et al. 2001) have been shown to act as intermediary factors that positively or negatively regulate gene transcription. These studies indicate that TIF1α and TIF1β act as scaffolds that link different classes of DNA-binding proteins and chromatin-associated proteins into larger regulatory complexes. Tif1γ is detected within nuclear foci (see Figure 6), which, based on our analysis, do not appear to correspond to several types of previously described nuclear bodies, including PML bodies. Localization of Tif1γ to these nuclear bodies may be regulated by posttranslational modification such as SUMO modification that is required for PML to form PML nuclear domains (Zhong et al. 2000a, 2000b; Best et al. 2002). These foci may serve as assembly points where Tif1γ forms multisubunit complexes with DNA-binding transcription factors and their other essential coactivators or corepressors, during the early stages of erythroid differentiation. It will be important to determine the identity of Tif1γ-interacting proteins in nuclear foci and establish how they function with Tif1γ to regulate blood cell development.

Materials and Methods



Zebrafish and mouse strains and studies

Zebrafish were maintained and staged as described (Westerfield 1998). The alleles montb222b and montg234 were generated in a large-scale screen for ENU-induced mutations (Ransom et al. 1996) on the TU, whereas the monm262 allele was derived on the AB strain and was originally called vampire (Weinstein et al. 1996). Mapping strains were constructed by mating to WIK or SJD polymorphic strains. Linkage analysis was performed on haploid or diploid embryos obtained from TU/SJD or TU/WIK hybrids. In situ hybridization and stainings of embryos were done as described (Thompson et al. 1998; Liao et al. 2002). In situ hybridization of mouse embryos was performed as described (Kingsley et al. 2001). Genomic DNA isolation, genotyping, AFLP analysis, and chromosomal walking were each performed as previously described (Brownlie et al. 1998; Ransom and Zon 1999). A complete list of primers for genetic mapping, RT-PCR, and sequencing of mon are available on request.

mRNA expression constructs, morpholinos, and microinjection

The full-length mon cDNA was subcloned into EcoRI and XhoI sites in the pCS2+ vector. Synthetic mRNA was transcribed in vitro, and microinjection was performed essentially as described (Liao et al. 2002).

Cell transplantation

Whole kidney marrow cells were isolated from adult gata1:EGFP transgenic donors, resuspended in 0.9X phosphate-buffered saline + 5% fetal bovine serum, and injected into the sinus venosus of 2-d-old montg234 −/− and control embryos. Between 102 and 103 kidney marrow cells were injected per embryo. Individual transplanted embryos were anesthetized and visualized daily under an inverted fluorescent microscope (DM-IRE2; Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) for GFP+ cells over a span of 12 d. On day 13 posttransplant, all surviving larvae (12/129; 9%) were placed in tanks and monitored for survival.

Antibodies, immunostaining, and immunoblots

Antisera against the human C-terminal TIF1γ sequence RRKRLKSDERPVHIK was generated in rabbits (Genemed Synthesis, South San Francisco, California, United States) and affinity purified. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts grown on coverslips were immunostained with HP1α (Chemicon, Temecula, California, United States) and Tif1γ antisera simultaneously. In brief, cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 5 min, washed with phosphate-buffered saline, and blocked with 5% serum (PBST) for 30 min. After incubation with the primary antibodies (PBST, 60 min) cells were washed three times with PBST and incubated with secondary antibodies (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, United States) followed by three washes in PBST. Cells were embedded with Vectashield/DAPI and analyzed using an Axioplan 2 microscope (Zeiss, Jena, Germany). Digital images were processed using the Volocity 1.0 software (Improvision, Lexington, Massachusetts, United States). G1E cell differentiation experiments were performed essentially as described (Weiss et al. 1997).

Supporting Information

Transplantation of wild-type zebrafish marrow cells carrying a gata1:GFP transgene into 2-d-old embryos reconstitutes erythropoiesis, but not viability, in montg234 homozygous mutants. Movies of live embryos at day 3 posttransplant highlight less than 100 GFP+ RBCs in circulation. Transplanted cells were observed to proliferate, resulting in thousands of donor-derived erythrocytes 7 d later. Movies present GFP-fluorescent images of live zebrafish larvae.

Video S1

Untransplanted Control montg234 Homozygous Mutants Had No Fluorescent Cells in Circulation at 3 Days of Development

(13.7 MB MOV).

Click here for additional data file.

Video S2

One Day after Transplantation, Less Than 100 GFP+ Erythrocytes Were Visible in the Circulation of Three montg234 Homozygous Mutants

(11.3 MB MOV).

Click here for additional data file.

Video S3

Untransplanted Control montg234 Homozygous Mutants Had No Fluorescent Cells in Circulation at 9 Days of Development

(7.9 MB MOV).

Click here for additional data file.

Video S4

Seven Days after Transplantation, Thousands of Donor-Derived Erythrocytes Were Visible in the Circulation of a Representative montg234 Homozygous Mutant

(11.2 MB MOV)

Click here for additional data file.

Accession Numbers

The GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank) accession numbers for the genes and gene products discussed in this paper are fly bonus (AAF19646), human TIF1α (015164), human TIF1β (Q13263), human TIFγ (Q9UPN9), human TIF1γ (Q9UPN9), mon (AY59853), mouse Tif1α (Q64127), mouse Tif1β (AAH58391), and mouse Tif1γ (NP444400).

The cDNA sequences of zebrafish mon/tif1γ and tif1α have been deposited in GenBank under the accession numbers AY598453 and AY598454, respectively.

Acknowledgements

We thank A. Davidson, J. Amatruda, and J. Christian for critical review of this manuscript; J. Postlethwait and W. Talbot for helpful discussions and experimental advice; B. Weinstein for the gift of the m262 allele of mon; and D. Giarla for administrative assistance. DGR was funded by the American Cancer Society and an award to Oregon Health and Science University by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) Biomedical Research Support Program for Medical Schools. LIZ and SHO are investigators of the HHMI. This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health.

Abbreviations

AFLP - amplified fragment length polymorphism

ENU - ethyl-nitrosourea

EST - expressed sequence tag

GFP - green fluorescent protein

hpf - hours postfertilization

KRAB - Krüppel-associated box

mon - moonshine; PAC

PML - promyelocytic leukemia gene product

RBCs - red blood cells

scl - stem cell leukemia; SSCP

TIF - transcriptional intermediary factor

TU - Tübingen background

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Zebrafish mon Mutants Have Severe Defects in Primitive Hematopoiesis

(A) Whole-mount TUNEL assays reveal that ventral-posterior mesodermal cells undergo apoptosis in homozygous montg234 mutant embryos. Whole-mount in situ hybridization of gata1 detected at the 12- and 18-somite stage in genotyped embryos. Posterior views, anterior to the left.

(B) Extensive apoptosis is visible in the trunk and tail (arrowhead) and also in hematopoietic cells of the embryonic blood island at 22 h of development (arrow). Whole-mount in situ hybridization at 22 hpf including scl, gata2, gata1, ikaros, and myb in montg234 mutants. Expression of myb is greatly reduced in the blood islands because of a loss of erythroid cells, but embryonic macrophages are still present (arrows). The expression of rag1 in thymic T-cells appears normal in mon mutants at 5 d postfertilization (arrow heads). Lateral views of 22 hpf and 5-d-old embryos.

Figure 2

Zebrafish mon Mutants Also Have Severe Defects in Definitive Hematopoiesis

Adult phenotype of wild-type and mon mutants. A rare surviving montb222 homozygous adult shows significant cardiomegaly in comparison to a wild-type age-matched control. Wright–Giemsa stained marrow of wild-type adult in comparison to a homozygous mutant. Note the dramatic reduction of terminally differentiated erythroid cells and the presence of abnormally large megaloblastic proerythroblasts in the montb222 mutant marrow.

Figure 3

Positional Cloning Identifies the mon Gene as Zebrafish tif1γ

(A) Physical map of the mon locus on zebrafish Chromosome 8. Microsatellite markers z987 and z11001 were used to initially identify recombinants in a panel of 2,200 diploid montg234 homozygous mutants. The AFLP marker MA3 was used to initiate a chromosomal walk in PAC libraries. The critical PACS that were isolated to encompass the mon locus are indicated by numbers above bar. The PAC 107N19 defines the critical interval for the mon gene. This PAC was used as a probe to screen cDNA libraries and to identify zebrafish tif1γ cDNAs. Numbers below the bar indicate the number of recombinants identified by SSCP analysis.

(B) Clustal-W–generated phylogentic tree of zebrafish (Danio rerio [Dr]) Tif1γ and Tif1α peptide sequences in comparison to TIF1 family members: human (Hs) TIF1α, TIF1β, and TIF1γ; mouse (Mm) Tif1α, Tif1β, and Tif1γ;; and fly (Dm) bonus.

(C) Diagrams illustrating the structure of the Tif1γ-predicted peptide and the three identified point mutants. RING finger (RING), B-boxes (B1 and B2), plant homeodomain finger (PHD) and bromodomain (BROMO). Numbers below the first diagram indicate the percent identity shared between each of these domains in zebrafish and human TIF1γ. The predicted truncated proteins are indicated.

(D) DNA sequence chromatograms showing the three ENU-induced point mutants in comparison to wild-type control sequences

Figure 4

The mon/tif1γ Gene Is Highly Expressed in Hematopoietic Mesoderm

(A) In situ hybridization of zebrafish embryos demonstrating the embryonic expression of tif1γ. tif1γ is initially expressed as a maternal mRNA. Increased expression of tif1γ in ventral-lateral mesoderm begins between the one- to three-somite stages and increases through early development. By five somites, tif1γ is strongly expressed in lateral stripes of mesoderm that also express scl. At 22 hpf tif1γ is expressed broadly in the brain, spinal cord, trunk, and tail mesenchyme, but is at much higher levels in hematopoietic cells of the blood island. Zebrafish tif1α is also broadly expressed but relatively more uniform in most tissues, in comparison to tif1γ. Tif1α is weakly expressed at early somite stages in hematopoietic mesoderm and uniformly expressed at 22 hpf, including expression in the blood islands. Expression of scl at five somites and 22 hpf highlights the embryonic blood island in comparison to tif1γ expression.

(B) In situ hybridization of mouse embryos detects broad expression of Tif1γ at embryonic day 8.5 including the yolk sac blood islands (arrow). AT embryonic day 12.5, there is high level expression in the fetal liver (arrow) and broad expression in the embryonic brain, spinal chord, gut, and muscle.

Figure 5

Overexpression of Wild-Type tif1γ mRNA or Marrow Transplantation Rescues Embryonic Hematopoiesis in mon Mutants

(A) montg234 mutants are rescued by injection of mRNA-encoding wild-type Tif1γ protein. At 4 d of development, large numbers of RBCs are visible in the circulation of wild-type zebrafish, shown here by o-dianisidine staining of hemoglobin. Uninjected monttg234 homozygous mutants are completely bloodless. Injection of 100 pg of wild-type tif1γ mRNA rescues erythropoiesis in mutant embryos. o-dianisidine-stained larvae are shown in ventral views to highlight blood in vessels.

(B) Transplantation of wild-type zebrafish marrow cells carrying a gata1:GFP transgene into 2-d-old embryos reconstitutes erythropoiesis, but not viability, in montg234 homozygous mutants. Still frames from movies of live embryos at day 3 posttransplant highlight less than 100 GFP+ RBCs in circulation (top). Transplanted cells were observed to proliferate resulting in thousands of donor-derived erythrocytes 7 d later (bottom). Arrows indicate the hearts of control and transplanted zebrafish. See Videos S1–S4.

Figure 6

Mammalian Tif1γ Protein Localizes to Nuclear Bodies Distinct from Heterochromatin

(A) Deconvolved immunofluorescence images of a mouse embryonic fibroblast cell nucleus stained with an anti-Tif1γ antibody and stained with a monoclonal antibody directed against HP1α. This is also compared to DAPI staining. The merged images of the nucleus show that Tif1γ does not colocalize with the HP1α or DAPI staining of heterochromatin while HP1α and DAPI staining overlap.

(B) G1ER mouse erythroleukemia cells express high levels of Tif1γ protein as detected by Western blot analysis. Expression of Tif1γ decreases during Gata1-dependent erythroid maturation induced by β-estradiol treatment to induce a Gata1–ER fusion protein.

Table 1

Overexpression of tif1γ mRNA Rescues mon Mutants: Hematopoietic Phenotypes

Synthetic tif1γ mRNA (100 pg) was injected at the one-cell stage into embryos of the indicated genotypes. For the mon embryos, circulating cells where counted each day through 4 d, when the embryos were fixed and stained with o-dianisidine to detect hemoglobin in mature RBCs. Normal embryos contain approximately 3,000 circulating cells at these time points. Results are given as number of embryos with the indicated phenotype. Numbers in parentheses represent percentage of total embryos analyzed

Table 2

Marrow Transplantation Rescues Hematopoiesis But Not Survival in mon Mutants: Embryos with Transplanted Erythroid Cells

Between 100 and 1,000 kidney marrow cells from adult gata1:EGFP transgenic donors were injected per zebrafish embryo at 48 hpf. Individual transplanted embryos were anesthetized and visualized for GFP+ erythroid cells. By 10 d posttransplantation the indicated number of embryos had an estimated 100 to 3,000 GFP+ cells in circulation. At 3 mo the indicated number of fish were alive. The relative percentage of embryos is shown in parentheses

Footnotes

Conflicts of interest. The authors have declared that no conflicts of interest exist.

Author contributions. DGR, NB, KN, DT, CB, NST, YZ, JP, SHO, and LIZ conceived and designed the experiments. DGR, NB, KN, DT, CB, NST, NPL, WJS, CAL, CH, BAB, and PDK performed the experiments. DGR, NB, KN, DT, CB, NST, NPL, YZ, JP, SHO, and LIZ analyzed the data. DGR, NB, KN, DT, NST, YZ, BAB, SL, and JP contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools. DGR, NB, KN, DT, and LIZ wrote the paper.

Academic Editor: William Talbot, Stanford University

¤Current address: Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon, United States of America

Citation: Ransom DG, Bahary N, Niss K, Traver D, Burns C, et al. (2004) The zebrafish moonshine gene encodes transcriptional intermediary factor 1γ, an essential regulator of hematopoiesis. PLoS Biol 2(8): e237.Spontaneous Autoimmunity in 129 and C57BL/6 Mice—Implications for Autoimmunity Described in Gene-Targeted Mice

Abstract

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multisystem autoimmune disorder in which complex genetic factors play an important role. Several strains of gene-targeted mice have been reported to develop SLE, implicating the null genes in the causation of disease. However, hybrid strains between 129 and C57BL/6 mice, widely used in the generation of gene-targeted mice, develop spontaneous autoimmunity. Furthermore, the genetic background markedly influences the autoimmune phenotype of SLE in gene-targeted mice. This suggests an important role in the expression of autoimmunity of as-yet-uncharacterised background genes originating from these parental mouse strains. Using genome-wide linkage analysis, we identified several susceptibility loci, derived from 129 and C57BL/6 mice, mapped in the lupus-prone hybrid (129 × C57BL/6) model. By creating a C57BL/6 congenic strain carrying a 129-derived Chromosome 1 segment, we found that this 129 interval was sufficient to mediate the loss of tolerance to nuclear antigens, which had previously been attributed to a disrupted gene. These results demonstrate important epistatic modifiers of autoimmunity in 129 and C57BL/6 mouse strains, widely used in gene targeting. These background gene influences may account for some, or even all, of the autoimmune traits described in some gene-targeted models of SLE.

Introduction

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disease characterised by the production of autoantibodies (auto-Abs) against a wide spectrum of self-antigens, mainly from subcellular compartments, especially the cell nucleus. Genetic predisposition is an important contributor to susceptibility to SLE in both humans and animals (Vyse and Todd 1996; Harley et al. 1998; Theofilopoulos and Kono 1999; Wakeland et al. 2001). Genes in multiple pathways participate in mediating disease pathogenesis, and epistatic interactions amongst these genes influence the expression of disease. In this context, both genetic linkage studies in spontaneous lupus-prone models and synthetic murine models of autoimmunity generated by targeted disruption of specific genes modulating the immune system have widely been used to investigate the complexity of SLE.

The best-studied strains of mice that spontaneously develop a lupus-like pathology are the New Zealand Black/New Zealand White hybrid strain (NZB/WF1); the MRL/Mp lpr/lpr strain, which carries the lpr mutation of the FAS receptor gene; and the BXSB strain, which carries the Y chromosome autoimmune accelerator (Yaa) gene (Theofilopoulos and Dixon 1985). Extensive genetic mapping studies in all three strains have identified multiple intervals associated with disease susceptibility. Interestingly, the majority of the intervals detected are strain-specific, confirming the genetic complexity of the disease and indicating the presence of extensive heterogeneity in the genes contributing to the pathogenesis of the disease. However, some susceptibility loci have been mapped to similar chromosome locations in different strains, suggesting that at least some susceptibility may be shared amongst lupus-prone strains. Amongst these shared susceptibility loci, the most striking are loci on distal Chromosome 1, for which important contributing genes have been found in New Zealand and BXSB models (Theofilopoulos and Kono 1999; Wakeland et al. 2001).

Although considerable efforts have been made to identify the genes responsible for the development of the disease, with the exception of the lpr mutation, none of the genetic contributions to disease in the three well-documented murine SLE strains have yet been fully resolved at the molecular or protein level. Thus, targeted genetic disruption of candidate genes encoding proteins of the immune system has been extensively used to examine their role in immune regulation. However, the most surprising result of this powerful approach has been the high frequency with which such mutations have been associated with an autoimmune phenotype. In this regard, it is of note that hybrid strains between 129 and C57BL/6 mice, widely used in the generation of gene-targeted mice, are spontaneously predisposed to development of humoral autoimmunity with low levels of glomerulonephritis (Obata et al. 1979; Botto et al. 1998; Bickerstaff et al. 1999; Santiago-Raber et al. 2001). Furthermore, the genetic background markedly influences the autoimmune phenotype in gene-targeted mice (Bolland and Ravetch 2000; Santiago-Raber et al. 2001; Mitchell et al. 2002). These observations led to the hypothesis that the autoimmune phenotype described in some gene-targeted mice might be due primarily to combinations of as-yet-uncharacterised background genes, originating from 129 and C57BL/6 mice strains, interacting or not with the mutated allele. To test this, we conducted a genome-wide scan analysis of two large cohorts of (129 × C57BL/6)F2 mice, one of which carried a mutation in the serum amyloid P component gene (Apcs). The Apcs-deficient mice (Apcs−/−) were chosen as an example of a gene-targeted strain previously reported to develop a lupus-like disease on the hybrid genetic background (129 × C57BL/6); autoimmunity in Apcs−/− mice persists even after backcrossing the mutated gene onto C57BL/6 (Bickerstaff et al. 1999). We chose this targeted gene in particular to study since the Apcs gene is located on Chromosome 1, approximately 94 cM from the centromere, within a region where several lupus-susceptibility loci, designated Sle1 (Morel et al. 2001), Nba2 (Drake et al. 1995; Vyse et al. 1997), and Bxs3 (Hogarth et al. 1998; Haywood et al. 2000), have been mapped in NZW, NZB, and BXSB lupus-prone strains, respectively. This region contains several genes, including those encoding FcγRII, the complement receptor CR1/2 (CD35/CD21), and the decay-accelerating factor CD55 (Prodeus et al. 1998; Bolland and Ravetch 2000; Miwa et al. 2002; Wu et al. 2002), which have each been implicated in the causation of SLE when inactivated by gene-targeting in 129 embryonic stem cells.

Here we show that there are multiple genetic loci, derived from both 129 and C57BL/6 mice, contributing to autoimmunity. Furthermore, a 129-derived interval on distal Chromosome 1, when transferred onto the C57BL/6 genome, a combination commonly created by backcrossing onto C57BL/6 a gene that has been inactivated in 129 embryonic stem cells, was sufficient to cause humoral autoimmunity in its own right, irrespective of the presence of the mutated Apcs gene. These results demonstrate important epistatic interactions between genes from 129 and C57BL/6 genomes on the development of autoimmunity and illustrate the important effects of background genes in the analysis and interpretation of autoimmune phenotypes associated with targeted genetic disruptions.

Results

Disease Traits in (129 × C57BL/6)F2 and (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− Mice

To investigate the genetic basis of the lupus-like disease observed in the (129 × C57BL/6) hybrid mice, we generated two large cohorts of (129 × C57BL/6)F2 animals, one carrying a mutation in the Apcs gene, and monitored them for 1 y under identical environmental conditions. Since female mice in the original reports showed a higher penetrance of disease, the present study was conducted only on female mice. The results of the phenotypic analysis at 1 y of age are summarised in Tables 1 and 2. As previously reported (Botto et al. 1998), the wild-type (129 × C57BL/6)F2 mice developed lupus traits with elevated levels of auto-Abs, starting from 6 mo of age (data not shown), and histological evidence of proliferative glomerulonephritis. In agreement with our previous observations (Bickerstaff et al. 1999), the titres of anti-nuclear Abs (ANAs) and anti-chromatin Ab were considerably greater in the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice compared with the strain-matched controls. However, in contrast to our original findings, the levels of the other two disease serological markers analysed (anti-single-stranded DNA [ssDNA] and anti-double-stranded DNA [dsDNA] Abs) and the severity of the renal pathology were not different between the two experimental groups. In view of the possibility of an association between the fixed 129-derived segment flanking the mutated Apcs gene and the autoimmune traits observed, the genome-wide linkage analysis of the two experimental cohorts was carried out separately.

Mapping of Loci Predisposing to Lupus in the Hybrid Strain (129 × C57BL/6)

Mice were genotyped with 143 microsatellite markers distributed throughout the autosomes such that 98% of the genes were within 20 cM of an informative marker. A summary of the genome-wide linkage analysis for each of the disease traits measured is shown in Table 3. The areas of linkage were defined according to the parental origin, 129 or C57BL/6. Only linkages identified in both experimental groups are reported in Table 3, with the exception of the Chromosome 1 distal segment, where the linkage analysis could not be applied to the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice as this region was of fixed 129 origin. Chromosomes where linkages were present only in one of the two cohorts are shown in Figures 1–3.

The quantitative trait linkage (QTL) analysis identified several intervals on Chromosome 1 with linkage to disease serological markers, and these regions were all derived from the 129 mouse strain (see Table 3; Figures 4 and 5). Interestingly, whilst ANA and anti-chromatin Ab levels showed suggestive or significant linkages only to the telomeric region of Chromosome 1, with an estimated peak occurring at a position approximately 90 cM near the Apcs gene, anti-dsDNA or anti-ssDNA Ab production was also linked to other segments on Chromosome 1, indicating a more complex genetic contribution from the 129 mouse strain.

Guided by these observations, we investigated whether the increased levels of ANA and anti-chromatin Ab observed in the Apcs−/− mice were caused by a gene(s) within the fixed 129 region surrounding the mutated Apcs gene, rather than caused by the mutated Apcs gene itself. We compared the levels of these auto-Abs between all (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice and a group of 33 wild-type mice that were selected for being homozygous 129 in the region of Chromosome 1 between microsatellites D1Mit105 and D1Mit 223 (80–106 cM) (Figure 6A–6D). In contrast to the results reported in Table 1, this comparison showed no significant differences between the two experimental groups. This result demonstrates that, most likely, the 129-derived region and not the lack of Apcs was mediating the production of ANA and anti-chromatin Ab. Consistent with this explanation, we found that the 129 mice have significantly higher levels of Apcs in circulation compared with the C57BL/6 mice (median, 83 mg/l; range, 25–208; n = 16 versus median, 5 mg/l; range, 4–9; n = 10, respectively; p < 0.0001). The C57BL/6 strain has previously been reported to be one of the murine strains defined as low Apcs producers (Pepys et al. 1979; Baltz et al. 1980). In addition, sequence analysis of the entire Apcs coding region in both strains failed to identify any coding sequence polymorphisms in the Apcs gene (data not shown), indicating that a structural variant of the protein is unlikely to be the explanation for our findings. This is consistent with a previous report by Drake et al. (1996) that showed no Apcs coding sequence differences amongst several autoimmune and nonautoimmune murine strains.

In addition to the 129-derived segments, in both cohorts the C57BL/6 strain contributed to the autoimmune traits with one major susceptibility locus on Chromosome 3. A genomic region between D3Mit40 and D3Mit13, with an estimated peak at position approximately 51 cM, showed a significant linkage to ANA production and weaker linkages to anti-ssDNA and anti-chromatin production (see Table 3; Figure 7). The high frequency of autoimmune phenotype in the (129 × C57BL/6) hybrid genetic background and its absence in either of the inbred parental strains imply that there are essential interactions between 129- and C57BL/6-derived alleles for the expression of autoimmunity. We investigated further the effects of genes from the C57BL/6 background by repeating the linkage analysis in (129 × C57BL/6)F2 mice, whilst controlling for the very strong 129 effect on distal Chromosome 1, as previously described (Zeng 1994). The results of this analysis showed that the statistical support for the linkage of the C57BL/6 locus on Chromosome 3 for ANA increased from logarithm of odds (LOD) 5.4 to LOD 6.4.

In contrast to these strong associations with disease serological markers, the QTL analysis identified only two potential linkages to glomerulonephritis: one in the wild-type mice on Chromosome 7 across a 10 cM region between D7Mit246 (15 cM) and D7Mit145 (26.5 cM) of 129 origin (LOD 2.86, p = 0.0013), and one on Chromosome 17 between D17Mit100 (11.7 cM) and D17Mit216 (29.4 cM) from the C57BL/6 strain (LOD 1.3, p = 0.049 and LOD 1.67, p = 0.021 in the wild-type and Apcs−/− mice, respectively). Histological evidence of glomerulonephritis was only found in approximately 20% of the mice in each cohort, which reduces the power of the QTL analysis for this disease trait.

Production of a C57BL/6.129 Chromosome 1 Congenic Line and Its Phenotypic Analysis

We generated a C57BL/6 congenic line carrying the telomeric region of Chromosome 1 from the 129 mouse strain, in order to dissect the complex polygenic disease phenotype of the (C57BL/6 × 129/Sv)F2 hybrid strain into its individual genetic components. The 129 interval was backcrossed seven times onto C57BL/6, and at each generation the presence or absence of the Chromosome 1 interval was determined with several microsatellite markers. Each backcrossed generation was screened with more than three markers per chromosome to facilitate the removal of unselected 129 genomic regions. At the end of the backcrossing, the 129-derived Chromosome 1 interval in the congenic mice extended from microsatellite marker D1Mit105 to D1Mit223 (80–106 cM), which encompasses the most important 129 interval identified by the linkage studies in the (C57BL/6 × 129/Sv)F2 mice.

Female Chromosome 1 congenic mice (C57BL/6.129[D1Mit105–223]), together with sex-matched Apcs−/− mice backcrossed onto C57BL/6 for ten generations (C57BL/6.Apcs−/−) and C57BL/6 controls, were monitored for the presence of lupus. In the C57BL/6.Apcs−/− mice, the 129 genome around the Apcs locus was mapped as a stretch of approximately 17 cM, positioned from 87.9 cM (D1Mit15) to 105 cM (D1Mit17). Thus, the congenic line carried a similar 129 region (80–106 cM) to the one present in the C57BL/6.Apcs−/− mice (87.9–105 cM). At 1 y of age, all animals were sacrificed, the auto-Abs assessed, and the renal histology examined. The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 8. As previously reported (Bickerstaff et al. 1999), the levels of auto-Abs were markedly increased in the C57BL/6.Apcs−/− compared to the wild-type C57BL/6 controls. However, the C57BL/6.129(D1Mit105–223) animals also expressed high levels of auto-Abs, and these titres were not different from those detected in the matched congenic mice containing a null mutation of the Apcs gene. These results clearly demonstrated that epistatic interactions between 129 loci on Chromosome 1 and C57BL/6 genes were sufficient to mediate the loss of tolerance to nuclear autoantigens. However, in contrast to the serological data, the histological assessment of the kidneys showed evidence of markedly increased glomerulonephritis in the C57BL/6.Apcs−/− compared to both control groups (Figure 9), suggesting that the lack of Apcs, when combined with other C57BL/6 susceptibility alleles, can induce the development of severe renal damage.

Discussion

There is accumulating evidence that background genes may influence the expression of autoimmunity in gene-targeted mice. Here we report what is to our knowledge the first systematic study that has examined this in the 129 and C57BL/6 mouse strains, widely used for gene targeting. Our results demonstrate interacting loci between 129 and C57BL/6 mice that can cause the expression of a powerful autoimmune phenotype in these animals, in the absence of any gene-targeted mutations. We also developed a congenic mouse strain bearing a portion of 129 Chromosome 1 on a C57BL/6 background and showed that this wild-type congenic line expressed striking anti-nuclear autoimmunity. By comparing this Chromosome 1 congenic strain with matched congenic mice lacking the Apcs gene, we demonstrated that serum amyloid P component deficiency influences the severity of glomerulonephritis, but is not the prime mover in the induction of anti-nuclear autoimmunity, contrary to our own original interpretation of our data (Bickerstaff et al. 1999). The same consideration applies to other genes located in the same Chromosome 1 region that have been implicated in the development of SLE when inactivated by gene-targeting in 129 embryonic stem cells and then backcrossed onto a pure genetic background (Bolland and Ravetch 2000; Miwa et al. 2002; Wu et al. 2002). For each, there has to be a question as to whether the anti-nuclear autoimmunity is due to the gene-targeted mutant gene or to the normal 129 genes expressed in the same region as the targeted gene.

The influence of background genes on the development of spontaneous autoimmune disease is well known, especially with respect to the lpr and Yaa disease-susceptibility genes. In MRL/Mp mice, the presence of the lpr gene accelerates the development of high level and broad-spectrum auto-Ab production and lethal glomerulonephritis, in addition to marked lymphoproliferative disease. In contrast, homozygosity of the lpr gene in other strains such as C57BL/6, AKR, LG/J, and C3H leads only to auto-Ab production (Izui et al. 1984). Similarly, the Y-chromosome-linked Yaa gene in BXSB and MRL/Mp males enhances the rapid development of auto-Abs and glomerulonephritis (Izui et al. 1988; Merino et al. 1989). However, in the C57BL/6 background, the Yaa gene does not lead to an autoimmune phenotype (Izui et al. 1988). Not surprisingly, important effects of the genetic background on the expression of autoimmunity have also been reported in gene-targeted mice (Bolland and Ravetch 2000; Santiago-Raber et al. 2001; Mitchell et al. 2002). Thus, SLE exists as a complex-trait disorder in which specific combinations of susceptibility alleles are required for the expression of the full phenotype.

Through the use of microsatellite marker maps, the identification of murine SLE susceptibility intervals in experimental crosses has been made possible. These mapping studies have shown that the disease expression in relation to the inheritance of the different alleles followed a threshold liability pattern in which a positive phenotype depended upon the presence of multiple discrete susceptibility loci with no single locus being a prerequisite factor. We have employed the same approach to analyse the genetic basis of disease inheritance in the (129 × C57BL/6) hybrid strain, the most common genetic background in gene-targeted mice. Although spontaneous autoimmunity has not been documented in either of the pure 129 or C57BL/6 strains, a spontaneous lupus-like phenotype has been described in (129 × C57BL/6) hybrid strains (Obata et al. 1979; Botto et al. 1998; Bickerstaff et al. 1999; Santiago-Raber et al. 2001), suggesting that the predisposition in these hybrid mice may arise as a result of the interaction between specific combinations of alleles inherited from both the 129 and C57BL/6 parental strains.

This was confirmed by the mapping study reported here. We showed that there are multiple genetic loci contributing to the disease and these are derived from both 129 and C57BL/6 mice. We demonstrated that a 129-derived segment of Chromosome 1 was strongly linked to the expression of auto-Abs. This region is probably capable of causing the initiation of a humoral autoimmune response to nuclear antigens; however, this response does not occur in the absence of C57BL/6 genes. In support of this, we identified a C57BL/6 segment on Chromosome 3, which may interact with the 129 genes on Chromosome 1 to mediate the loss of tolerance. Interestingly, although the C57BL/6 SLE-susceptibility region on Chromosome 3 is novel, disease-modifying alleles derived from C57BL/10 and C57BL/6 strains have been mapped to a portion of Chromosome 3 close to the region identified in this study (Morel et al. 1999; Haywood et al. 2000). Furthermore, the region on Chromosome 7 associated with the development of lupus nephritis has been linked to the same trait in other murine models of SLE (Santiago et al. 1998; Morel et al. 1999; Xie et al. 2002), suggesting the possibility of shared susceptibility loci.

Taken together our results suggest a complex genetic contribution from the (129 × C57BL/6) hybrid background genome, with both enhancing as well as inhibitory loci from the 129 mouse, in addition to genes promoting autoimmunity from the C57BL/6 mice. The impact that these interacting loci may have on the lupus-like disease present in several gene-targeted animals was further assessed by comparing Apcs−/− mice with Chromosome 1 genetically matched controls.

In the context of SLE susceptibility, one of the most consistently mapped non-MHC regions of the mouse genome is the telomeric Chromosome 1 segment, where several disease loci, designated Sle1 (Morel et al. 2001), Nba2 (Drake et al. 1995; Rozzo et al. 1996; Vyse et al. 1997), and Bxs3 (Hogarth et al. 1998), have been mapped in lupus-prone strains. Moreover, this region of mouse Chromosome 1 is orthologous to a region on human Chromosome 1q22–1q25, which has also been linked with human SLE (Moser et al. 1998).

The Apcs gene is one of the candidate genes known to lie within this region. The human serum amyloid P component binds avidly to DNA, chromatin, and apoptotic cells in physiological conditions in vitro (Pepys 1974; Pepys and Butler 1987; Butler et al. 1990) and also to exposed chromatin and apoptotic cells in vivo (Hintner et al. 1988; Breathnach et al. 1989; Familian et al. 2001). We have previously reported that (129 × C57BL/6).Apcs−/− mice spontaneously produce a wide range of ANAs and develop significant immune complex glomerulonephritis (Bickerstaff et al. 1999). On the basis of these observations, it was postulated that Apcs, by altering the clearance of chromatin, contributes to the pathogenesis of SLE. However, in this study we found that only ANA and anti-chromatin Ab levels were significantly increased in the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice. A possible explanation for this discrepancy may lie in the fact that the Apcs−/− mice analysed in the original study were generated from a limited number of founders and that this may have caused a nonrandom inheritance of the loci from the parental strains. Furthermore, the whole-genome analysis identified the 129 region surrounding the Apcs gene as the main locus contributing to the development of ANA and anti-chromatin Ab. In agreement with this, when we carried out a selective comparison between the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice and Chromosome 1 genetically matched controls, we failed to detect any significant difference in the levels of these two auto-Abs. These findings, taken together, indicated that the phenotype associated with Apcs deficiency was caused by the presence of unaltered 129 genes from the telomeric region of Chromosome 1 operating in the C57BL/6 genomic background. Strong supportive evidence for this was provided by the analysis of the C57BL/6 mice congenic for this 129 region.

The generation and analysis of congenic strains have successfully been used to dissect the contribution of individual susceptibility alleles to a multigenic trait such as SLE. We adopted the same strategy to investigate the relative contribution of the 129 Chromosome 1 segment and the Apcs gene to each disease trait. Using this approach, we demonstrated that the 129 interval on distal Chromosome 1, when transferred onto the C57BL/6 genome, a combination commonly created by backcrossing onto C57BL/6 a mutated gene located in that chromosomal region, was sufficient to mediate the production of auto-Abs. In this context, it is of note that several strains of mice with targeted mutations of genes encoded in this region have been reported to express a lupus-like illness, including mice lacking FcγRIIB (Bolland and Ravetch 2000), complement receptors (CR1/2) (Prodeus et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2002), and decay-accelerating factor (CD55) (Miwa et al. 2002). In each case, the autoimmune phenotype was described in mice in which the null mutation was generated in 129 embryonic stem cells and then backcrossed to the C57BL/6 or another genetic background. Thus, in view of our findings, one may postulate that in each of these murine models of SLE, the effects of the targeted null gene were irrelevant. Similar conclusions may apply to other gene-targeted animals carrying mutations of genes mapped in the 129-derived susceptibility allele on Chromosome 7 (O'Keefe et al. 1996, 1999).

The expression of anti-nuclear autoimmunity was identical comparing the congenic with the Apcs−/− mice. The only difference in phenotype between these mice was in the expression of glomerulonephritis, which was more pronounced in the Apcs−/− mice compared with the congenic mice. Although these findings demonstrate that Apcs is not implicated in the processing of autoantigens, as it had previously been suggested, they indicate that Apcs might still play an important protective role in lupus nephritis. In support of this, the expression of the human C-reactive protein, an acute-phase protein closely related to Apcs, has been shown to delay the onset and severity of lupus nephritis in the NZB/W strain by preventing the deposition of immune complexes in the renal cortex (Szalai et al. 2003). Consistent with this, a polymorphism associated with reduced basal level of C-reactive protein has been reported to be linked to SLE in humans (Russell et al. 2004). However, as the congenic mice and the Apcs−/− mice carried similar but not identical 129 regions on Chromosome 1, an alternative explanation for our findings may still lay in the numerous and complex synergistic and counteractive interactions between 129 and C57BL/6 genes involved in self-tolerance and end organ damage. Thus, whilst the lack of lupus nephritis in the congenic mice is consistent with the need for multiple susceptibility genes for the full expression of lupus, further studies will be required to fully elucidate the role of Apcs in the pathogenesis of renal damage.

In summary, our findings demonstrate the impact of epistatic interactions between 129 and C57BL/6 genomes on the development of SLE and illustrate how these background gene effects may lead to incorrect interpretations when analysing the autoimmune phenotype of specific genetic disruptions.

Materials and Methods



Mice.

All the mice were females. Wild-type C57BL/6 and 129/Sv (129S6, according to the revised nomenclature) were bred and maintained in the animal care facility at Imperial College, London, United Kingdom. (129 × C57BL/6)F1 mice were generated by intercrossing the two wild-type strains and (129 × C57BL/6)F2 mice by interbreeding the (129 × C57BL/6)F1 mice. The Apcs−/−mice were generated as previously reported (Botto et al. 1997), and the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice were generated by intercrossing Apcs−/− mice on the 129 genetic background with Apcs−/− animals backcrossed onto C57BL/6 for ten generations. A total of 141 (129 × C57BL/6)F2 and 158 (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− female mice were produced and monitored for 1 y. Wild-type congenic C57BL/6.129(D1Mit105–223) mice were generated by backcrossing the 129 interval between microsatellites D1Mit105 and D1Mit223 (80 cM to 106 cM) onto the C57BL/6 strain. Inherited 129 regions were mapped with microsatellite markers polymorphic between 129 and C57BL/6 mice (see below). After seven generations of backcrossing, siblings were intercrossed to generate C57BL/6.129(D1Mit105–223) congenic mice homozygous for the 129 Chromosome 1 interval. Inside 129 markers at positions 81.6 cM (D1Mit159) and 105 cM (D1Mit17), respectively, and an outside C57BL/6 marker at position 74.3cM (D1Mit159) were used to further define the interval. In the C57BL/6.Apcs−/− mice (backcrossed onto C57BL/6 for ten generations), the 129 genome around the Apcs locus was mapped as a segment from 87.9 cM (D1Mit15) to 105 cM (D1Mit17). In this analysis, the inside 129 markers were at positions 93 cM (D1Mit36) and 99.7 cM (D1Mit115) and the outside C57BL/6 markers at positions 81.6 cM (D1Mit159) and 106 cM (D1Mit223). Along with 28 C57BL/6.Apcs−/−mice and 30 C57BL/6 wild-type animals, 26 C57BL/6.129(D1Mit105–223) female mice −/−were followed up to 1 y of age. Animals were maintained in specific pathogen-free conditions. All animal procedures were in accordance with institutional guidelines.

Serological analyses.

Sera, collected at 6 and 12 mo of age, were assayed for the presence of auto-Abs. Levels of IgG ANA were sought by indirect immunofluorescence using Hep-2 cells, and anti-dsDNA Abs were detected by indirect immunofluorescence on Crithidia luciliae as previously described (Mitchell et al. 2002). Serum samples were screened at a 1:80 (ANA) or 1:20 (anti-dsDNA) dilution and the positive samples titrated to endpoint. Abs to ssDNA and anti-chromatin were measured by ELISA, as previously described (Mitchell et al. 2002). Samples were screened at a 1:100 dilution, and the results were expressed in arbitrary ELISA units (AEUs) relative to a standard positive sample (derived from an MRL/Mp.lpr/lpr mouse), which was assigned a value of 100. For interplate comparison, serial dilutions of a positive control serum sample were included on each plate. Apcs levels were assessed by ELISA using sheep anti-mouse Apcs and rabbit anti-mouse Apcs Abs (Calbiochem, Nottigham, United Kingdom). Samples were screened at a 1:3,000 dilution, and the results were expressed in milligrams per liters, referring to a standard curve derived from an acute-phase serum with a known concentration of Apcs (Calbiochem). Apcs−/− mouse serum was included as a negative control.

Histological analysis.

All the mice, except the few that died before the end of the experiment, were sacrificed at 1 y of age, and kidney portions were fixed in Bouin's solution and paraffin embedded, and sections were stained with periodic acid–Schiff reagent. Glomerular histology was graded in a blinded fashion as follows: grade 0, normal; grade 1, hypercellularity involving greater than 50% of the glomerular tuft in 25%–50% of glomeruli; grade 2, hypercellularity involving greater than 50% of the glomerular tuft in 50%–75% of glomeruli; grade 3, glomerular hypercellularity in greater than 75% of glomeruli or crescents in greater than 25% of glomeruli.

Statistical analysis

Non-parametric data are expressed as median with range of values in parentheses. All statistics were calculated using GraphPad PrismTM version 3.0 for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego, California, United States). Non-parametric tests were applied throughout, with differences being considered significant for p values < 0.05. The Mann–Whitney test was used for comparison of two groups, whilst for analysis of three groups the Kruskal–Wallis test with Dunn's multiple comparison test was used.

Genotypic analysis

Genotyping was carried out by PCR of genomic DNA using 143 polymorphic markers (list available on request) distributed throughout all 19 autosomes. PCRs were performed using standard reagents containing 1.5 mM MgCl2 and 0.4 μM primers. Microsatellite markers were screened for size polymorphisms between 129 and C57BL/6 mice. Only primers with differences detectable on ethidium bromide-stained agarose gels or on SDS-polyacrylamide gels were used.

Linkage analysis

The QTL program MAPMANAGER.QTL (ftp://mcbio.med.buffalo.edu/pub/MapMgr/) was used, and the two experimental groups were examined independently. Only data from mice at 12 mo of age were analysed. Log transformations of auto-Abs levels resulted in more normalised distribution and were used in QTL mapping. LOD thresholds for suggestive and significant linkages were determined by using a cohort- and trait-specific permutation test (1,000 permutations). The average threshold for suggestive, significant, and highly significant linkages were LOD ≥ 2.1 (p ≤ 7.8 × 10−3), LOD ≥ 3.6 (p ≤ 2.4 × 10−4), and LOD ≥ 5 (p ≤ 1 × 10−5), respectively (Manly and Olson 1999).

Supporting Information

Accession Numbers

The LocusLink (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/) ID numbers for the genes and gene products discussed in this paper are Apcs (LocusLink ID 20219), CD35/CD21 (LocusLink ID 12902), CD55 (LocusLink ID 13136), the FAS receptor gene (LocusLink ID 14102), and FcγRII (LocusLink ID 14130).

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to M. Lewis for the processing of the samples for histology and to F. Reid and D. Mitchell for their help. We thank all of the staff in the animal facility for their technical assistance. This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust (grant number 061438). JCH was a recipient of a fellowship from the National Institute of Health, Spain (BEFI 99/9212).

Abbreviations

Ab - antibody

ANA - anti-nuclear antibody

AEU - arbitrary ELISA unit

Apcs−/− - Apcs-deficient mice

Apcs - serum amyloid P component gene

dsDNA - double-stranded DNA

LOD - logarithm of odds

QTL - quantitative trait linkage

SLE - systemic lupus erythematosus

ssDNA - anti-single-stranded DNA

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Linkage of Chromosome 2 with ANA and Anti-Chromatin Abs in (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− Mice

These associations were not detected in (129 × C57BL/6)F2 animals. Centimorgan positions were deduced by interval mapping, anchoring marker locations to data from http://www.informatics.jax.org. Dotted lines and the dashed line indicate the threshold over which linkages were considered suggestive or significant, respectively, as defined in Materials and Methods.

Figure 3

Linkage of Chromosome 4 with Anti-dsDNA Abs

The estimated peak in (129 × C57BL/6)F2 mice was at position 51.3 cM, whilst in the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/−animals it was was at position 71 cM, indicating that most likely these were two independent loci. Centimorgan positions were deduced by interval mapping, anchoring marker locations to data from http://www.informatics.jax.org. Dotted lines the indicate threshold over which linkage was considered suggestive, as defined in Materials and Methods.

Figure 4

Interval Mapping Scans Showing QTL on Chromosome 1 with Anti-dsDNA and Anti-ssDNA Abs

Centimorgan positions were deduced by interval mapping, anchoring marker locations to data from http://www.informatics.jax.org. Dotted lines indicate the threshold over which linkage was considered suggestive, dashed lines indicate the threshold over which linkage was considered significant, and dotted/dashed lines indicate highly significant linkage, as defined in Materials and Methods. See Table 3 for additional details.

Figure 5

Interval Mapping Scans Showing QTL on Chromosome 1 with ANA and Anti-Chromatin Abs

Centimorgan positions were deduced by interval mapping, anchoring marker locations to data from http://www.informatics.jax.org. Dotted lines indicate the threshold over which linkage was considered suggestive, and dashed lines indicate the threshold over which linkage was considered significant, as defined in Materials and Methods. See Table 3 for additional details.

Figure 6

Auto-Ab Profiles

(A) ANA titres in the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice and (129 × C57BL/6)F2 at 1 y of age. A small circle represents one mouse; a large circle, a variable number of animals, as indicated in parentheses. Serum samples were titrated to endpoint.

(B) ANA titres in the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs −/− mice and a selected number of wild-type (129 × C57BL/6)F2 animals carrying the Chromosome 1 region between D1Mit105 and D1Mit223 (80–106 cM) of 129 origin. The symbols are as in (A).

(C and D) Anti-chromatin Ab levels expressed in AEUs related to a standard positive sample, which was assigned a value of 100 AEU. The comparison is between the same groups of mice as in (A) and (B), respectively. The symbols are as in (A).

Figure 7

Interval Mapping Scans Showing QTL on Chromosome 3 with ANA, Anti-Chromatin, and Anti-ssDNA Abs

See Table 3 for additional details. Centimorgan positions were deduced by interval mapping, anchoring marker locations to data from http://www.informatics.jax.org. Dotted lines indicate the threshold over which linkage was considered suggestive, the dashed line indicate the threshold over which linkage was considered significant, and dotted/dashed lines indicate highly significant linkage, as defined in Materials and Methods.

Figure 8

Auto-Ab Profiles

(A) ANA titres in C57BL/6 mice, C57BL/6.Apcs −/− mice, and C57BL/6.129(D1Mit105–223) congenic mice at 1 y of age. Small symbols represent one mouse; large symbols, a variable number of animals as indicated in parentheses. Serum sample were titrated to endpoint.

(B and C) Anti-ssDNA (B) and anti-chromatin (C) Ab levels in the same cohorts of mice as in (A). The Ab levels are expressed in AEUs related to a standard positive sample, which was assigned a value of 100 AEU.

(D) Anti-dsDNA Ab levels. Serum samples were screened at 1:20. Samples that were positive were titrated to endpoint. The symbols are as in (A).

Figure 9

Renal Histological Assessment

C57BL/6 mice, C57BL/6.Apcs−/− mice, and C57BL/6.129(D1Mit105–223) congenic mice were sacrificed at 1 y of age to obtain age-matched autopsy specimens. Bouin's fixed kidney sections were scored blinded for glomerulonephritis. Glomerulonephritis was graded on a 0–3 scale (see Materials and Methods for details).

Figure 2

Linkage of Chromosome 8 with Anti-Chromatin and Anti-dsDNA Abs in (129 × C57BL/6)F2 Mice

These linkages were not detected in (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− animals. Centimorgan positions were deduced by interval mapping, anchoring marker locations to data from http://www.informatics.jax.org. Dotted lines indicate the threshold over which linkage was considered suggestive, as defined in Materials and Methods.

Table 1

Spontaneous Auto-Abs in Apcs−/− and Wild-Type (129 × C57BL/6)F2 Female Mice

Significant differences between Apcs−/− and wild-type controls by Mann–Whitney U test. The numbers tested for different phenotypes are not equal due to the limited amount of serum or death of the mice before the end of the experiment. NS, not significant

Table 2

Histological Assessment of Kidney Sections in Apcs−/− and Wild-Type (129 × C57BL/6)F2 Female Mice

The renal sections were scored on a 0–3 scale on the intensity and extent of the histopathological changes as described in Materials and Methods. The difference between the two experimental groups was not significant

Table 3

Summary of Genome-Wide Linkage Analysis in Apcs−/− and Wild-Type (129 × C57BL/6)F2 Female Mice

a Suggestive linkage

b Significant linkage

c Highly significant linkage as defined in the material and method section

Chr, Chromosome; Est. Peak, Estimated Peak; LOD, logarithm of odds; N/A, not applicable

Chromosomes where linkages were not present in both experimental groups are not illustrated. See Materials and Methods for details. The oligonucleotide sequences and approximate positions of the microsatellite markers used were taken from the Mouse Genome Database, Mouse Genome Informatics, Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, United States (http://www.informatics.jax.org)

Footnotes

Conflicts of interest. The authors have declared that no conflicts of interest exist.

Author contributions. MJW, TJV, and MB conceived and designed the experiments. AEB, KLR, JW, JC-H, and RJR performed the experiments. AEB, KLR, RJR, and HTC analyzed the data. MB wrote the paper.

Academic Editor: David Nemazee, Scripps Research Institute

¤ Current address: The Wellcome Trust, London, United Kingdom

Citation: Bygrave AE, Rose KL, Cortes-Hernandez J, Warren J, Rigby RJ, et al. (2004) Spontaneous autoimmunity in 129 and C57BL/6 mice—Implications for autoimmunity described in gene-targeted mice. PLoS Biol 2(8): e243.Loss of KCNJ10 protein expression abolishes endocochlear potential and causes deafness in Pendred syndrome mouse model

Abstract

Background

Pendred syndrome, a common autosomal-recessive disorder characterized by congenital deafness and goiter, is caused by mutations of SLC26A4, which codes for pendrin. We investigated the relationship between pendrin and deafness using mice that have (Slc26a4+/+) or lack a complete Slc26a4 gene (Slc26a4-/-).

Methods

Expression of pendrin and other proteins was determined by confocal immunocytochemistry. Expression of mRNA was determined by quantitative RT-PCR. The endocochlear potential and the endolymphatic K+ concentration were measured with double-barreled microelectrodes. Currents generated by the stria marginal cells were recorded with a vibrating probe. Tissue masses were evaluated by morphometric distance measurements and pigmentation was quantified by densitometry.

Results

Pendrin was found in the cochlea in apical membranes of spiral prominence cells and spindle-shaped cells of stria vascularis, in outer sulcus and root cells. Endolymph volume in Slc26a4-/- mice was increased and tissue masses in areas normally occupied by type I and II fibrocytes were reduced. Slc26a4-/- mice lacked the endocochlear potential, which is generated across the basal cell barrier by the K+ channel KCNJ10 localized in intermediate cells. Stria vascularis was hyperpigmented, suggesting unalleviated free radical damage. The basal cell barrier appeared intact; intermediate cells and KCNJ10 mRNA were present but KCNJ10 protein was absent. Endolymphatic K+ concentrations were normal and membrane proteins necessary for K+ secretion were present, including the K+ channel KCNQ1 and KCNE1, Na+/2Cl-/K+ cotransporter SLC12A2 and the gap junction GJB2.

Conclusions

These observations demonstrate that pendrin dysfunction leads to a loss of KCNJ10 protein expression and a loss of the endocochlear potential, which may be the direct cause of deafness in Pendred syndrome.

Background

Pendred syndrome is a relatively common autosomal-recessive disorder characterized by deafness and goiter [1]. The syndrome is caused by mutations of the PDS gene SLC26A4, which codes for the protein pendrin [2]. Deafness is congenital and generally profound although sometimes late in onset and provoked by light head injury. Vestibular dysfunction is uncommon. Goiter is variable and generally develops around puberty [3]. The cause of goiter appears to be an impairment of iodide fixation in the follicular lumen due to a reduced rate of iodide transport across the apical membrane of thyroid gland epithelial cells [4]. A positive perchlorate discharge test and an enlarged vestibular aqueduct appear to be the most reliable clinical signs of Pendred syndrome [5].

Pendrin is an anion exchanger that can transport Cl-, I-, HCO3 - and formate [6,7]. Expression has been found in the inner ear and thyroid gland consistent with the clinical signs of deafness and goiter [2,3,8]. In addition, pendrin expression has been found in the kidney [9], mammary gland [10], uterus [11], testes [12] and placenta [13]. No expression was found in fetal or adult brain, consistent with a peripheral cause of deafness [2,11].

Expression of pendrin mRNA in the inner ear has been found in several places including the cochlea, the vestibular labyrinth and the endolymphatic sac [8]. The precise location of pendrin protein expression, however, has not yet been determined. The variability of deafness in Pendred syndrome and the observation that deafness is sometimes late in onset suggest that pendrin dysfunction may not be the direct cause of deafness. It is conceivable that pendrin dysfunction favors changes in the expression levels of proteins that are critical for the maintenance of the hearing function. Detailed studies aimed at identifying the direct cause of deafness in Pendred syndrome have recently become possible due to the generation of a pendrin-specific polyclonal antibody [9] and the development of Slc26a4-/- mice, which bear a targeted disruption of the mouse Slc26a4 gene [14]. The aim in the present study was to determine the location of pendrin and the cause of deafness in Slc26a4-/- mice.

Methods

The endocochlear potential and the endolymphatic and perilymphatic K+ concentrations were measured in young adult mice (1–4 month of age) that either have (Slc26a4+/+) or lack (Slc26a4-/-) a functional gene for pendrin [14]. The mouse strain 129Sv/Ev (Taconic, Germantown, NY) was chosen as the source of Slc26a4+/+ controls, since Slc26a4-/- mice were propagated in the this strain and generated using a stem cell line derived from 129Sv/Ev. Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- were agouti. They did not differ in coat color. Differences in pigmentation were verified using coisogenic age-matched Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- that were bred in parallel.

Expression of key proteins involved in the generation of the endocochlear potential and the transport of K+ was studied using confocal immunocytochemistry and quantitative RT-PCR. K+ secretion and the generation of the endocochlear potential were measured using electrophysiological techniques. All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Kansas State University.

Confocal immunocytochemistry

Animals were deeply anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (100 mg/kg i.p.) and transcardially perfused with a Cl--free phosphate-buffered Na-gluconate solution containing 4% paraformaldehyde. Temporal bones were removed and cochleae fixed by perilymphatic perfusion, decalcified in EDTA, processed through a sucrose gradient and infiltrated with polyethylene glycol. Mid-modiolar cryosections (12 μm, CM3050S, Leica, Nussloch, Germany) were blocked in PBS with 0.2% Triton-X (PBS-TX) and 10% bovine serum albumin. Slides were incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies in PBS-TX with 1–3% BSA [rabbit anti-pendrin, 1:500 (h766–780); rat anti-ZO-1, 1:100 (Chemicon, Temecula, CA); goat anti-KCNQ1, 1:200 (C20, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), rabbit anti-KCNE1, 1:200 (Alomone, Jerusalem, Israel); rabbit anti-KCNJ10, 1:300 (Alomone); rabbit anti-SLC12A2, 1:100 (Chemicon); and rabbit anti-connexin 26, 1:100 (Zymed, San Francisco, CA)]. Slides were washed in PBS-TX and incubated for 1 h at 25°C with appropriate secondary antibodies at a 1:1000 dilution in PBS-TX with 1–3% BSA [donkey anti-rabbit Alexa 488, chicken anti-rat Alexa 594, and chicken anti-goat Alexa 594 (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR)]. Actin filaments were visualized by staining with Alexa 488 conjugated phalloidin (Molecular Probes). After incubation, slides were washed with PBS-TX, mounted with FluorSave (Calbiochem, La Jolla, CA), and viewed by confocal microscopy (LSM 5 Pascal or LSM 510 Meta, Carl Zeiss, Jena or Göttingen, Germany). Laser scanning brightfield images were collected to document structural preservation, for morphometric analysis and for analysis of pigmentation.

Quantitative RT-PCR

Animals were deeply anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (100 mg/kg i.p.). Kidneys and brain were removed and pulverized in liquid N2. Temporal bones were removed and two preparations of inner ear tissues were obtained by microdissection: (1) stria vascularis without spiral ligament, and (2) spiral ganglia including the surrounding bone and the organ of Corti. The dissection medium was changed twice during the microdissection and isolated tissues were washed three times to minimize cross-contamination. The Slc26a4-/-genotype was verified by the observation of large otoconia in the utricular macula [14]. Total RNA was isolated and residual DNA contamination was removed by enzymatic digestion (RNeasy micro, Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Quality and quantity of 18S rRNA obtained from kidneys and brain were determined (Nano Assay, 2100 Bioanalyzer, Agilent, Palo Alto, CA). Further, the quality of RNA preparations obtained from stria vascularis and spiral ganglia was assessed (Pico Assay, 2100 Bioanalyzer). Real time RT-PCR was performed on RNA obtained from individual animals (OneStep RT-PCR, Qiagen; Smart Cycler, Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA) in the presence of 0.2× SYBR green I (Molecular Probes). Transcripts of 18S rRNA and mRNA for the K+ channels KCNJ10, KCNQ1 and KCNQ4 were amplified using gene-specific primers (Table 1). RT was performed for 30 min at 50°C and 15 min at 95°C. PCR consisted of 50 cycles of 1 min at 60°C, 1 min at 72°C, 7s heating to hot-measurement temperature, 13s hot-measurement at 3–5°C below product melting temperature (Table 1) and 1 min at 94°C. Hot-measurements were performed to eliminate the detection of primer-dimers that had melting temperatures between 72 and 75°C [15]. PCR was followed by a melt (60 to 95°C). The generation of a single product of appropriate size was routinely checked by the presence of a single melt peak and by agarose gel-electrophoresis. Product identity was confirmed by sequencing.

Table 1

Primers

Template molecules (T) were quantified according to T = P / (F ^Ct) where P is the number of product molecules, F is the fidelity of the reaction and Ct is the cycle at which the number of product molecules reaches a chosen threshold [15]. Fidelity (F) was obtained from the slope (S) of the log-linear phase of the growth curve via a best-fit fifth-order polynomial: F = 7.39 + 3.80 × S + 1.05 × S2 + 0.15 × S3 + 11.38 × 10-3 * S4 + 3.39 × 10-4 × S5. The number of product molecules at threshold (PCt) was determined by amplification of known amounts of 18S rRNA according to PCt = T × F ^Ct. Quantifications of 18S rRNA were used to compare tissue amounts. Genomic contamination of inner ear samples was assessed to be <0.02% by omission of the RT step.

In vitro electrophysiology

Animals were deeply anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (100 mg/kg i.p.). Stria vascularis without spiral ligament was obtained by microdissection. Currents generated by the stria marginal epithelium were recorded [16]. A Pt-Ir wire microelectrode with a Pt-black tip was positioned 20–30 μm from the apical surface of the epithelium and vibrated at 200–400 Hz by piezo-electric bimorph elements (Applicable Electronics, Forest Dale, MA; ASET version 1.05, Science Wares, East Falmouth, MA). A Pt-black electrode (26-gauge) served as reference in the bath chamber. The signals from the phase-sensitive detectors were digitized (16 bit) at a rate of 0.5 Hz. The output was expressed as current density at the electrode.

In situ electrophysiology

Animals were anesthetized with inactin (thiobutabarbital sodium salt, 140 mg/kg ip). The endocochlear potential and the endolymphatic [K+] were measured with double-barreled microelectrodes [17]. Measurements were made in the basal turn by a round-window approach through the basilar membrane and in the apical turn after thinning the bone over the stria vascularis and picking a small hole (~30 μm). K+-selective electrodes were calibrated in solutions of constant cation (K+ and Na+) concentration of 150 mM. The minor selectivity of the K+ electrodes for Na+ produced a nonlinearity in the calibration curve, which was closely fitted by the Nicolski equation using nonlinear curve-fitting software (OriginLab, Northampton, MA): V = Vi + S × log ([K+] + A × [Na+]), where Vi is an offset term, S is slope, A is selectivity, and [Na+] is Na+ concentration. Calibrations were made immediately after withdrawal of the electrodes from the cochlea. Plasma K+ concentrations were obtained using a blood analyzer (Stat Profile M, Nova Biomedical, Waltham, MA).

Data are presented as mean ± sem; n denotes the number of experiments. Differences were considered significant when p < 0.05.

Results and Discussion

In situ hybridization in the cochlea has suggested that pendrin mRNA is expressed in cells that reside immediately beneath the spiral prominence on the lateral wall of the external sulcus [8]. To determine the location of pendrin protein expression, we performed confocal immunocytochemistry on cryosections prepared from temporal bones of normal (Slc26a4+/+) mice using an established antibody [3]. Staining was absent when the primary antibody was pre-absorbed with the antigenic peptide (data not shown). Strong expression of pendrin was observed not only in outer sulcus epithelial cells, as predicted from in situ hybridization data, but also in root cells, in apical membranes of spiral prominence surface epithelial cells and in apical membranes of spindle-shaped cells that are part of stria vascularis (Fig. 1a,1b,1c). The presence of pendrin in spindle-shaped cells suggests that these cells secrete HCO3 - into endolymph. Pendrin-mediated HCO3 - transport has previously been shown in the kidney [9]. HCO3 - in the cochlea may be generated from CO2 by carbonic anhydrase located in strial intermediate cells [18,19]. CO2 may be supplied by the metabolically highly active stria marginal cells. It is conceivable that pendrin dysfunction interrupts HCO3 - secretion and leads to an accumulation of HCO3 - in stria vascularis. Preliminary data (Wangemann et al., unpublished) support a role for pendrin in HCO3 - secretion into endolymph.

Figure 1

Protein localization of pendrin, KCNQ1, ZO-1 and F actin in cochlea and vestibular labyrinth of Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice. a: Overview of cochlea; bar = 100 μm. b-f: Detail of cochlear lateral wall; bar = 10 μm. g: Detail of utricle; bar = 10 μm. h-i: Detail of ampulla; bar = 10 μm. RM, Reissner's membrane; SC, spindle-shaped cells, SMC, strial marginal cells; SV, stria vascularis; SL, spiral ligament; LIM, spiral limbus. BC, basal cells; SP, spiral prominence epithelial cells; RC, root cells; OS, outer sulcus epithelial cells; VHC, vestibular hair cells; VTC, vestibular transitional cells; VDC, vestibular dark cells; arrows, basal cells at the top and bottom of stria vascularis form tight junctions with surface epithelial cells.

The extent of pendrin expression in spiral prominence cells and stria vascularis was determined by labeling KCNQ1, a K+ channel that is expressed in strial marginal cells, and ZO-1, a tight junction protein that labels basal cells and thereby delineates the boundaries of stria vascularis. Dual labeling experiments demonstrated that pendrin is expressed in spindle-shaped cells, which are surface epithelial cells in stria vascularis adjacent to strial marginal cells near the borders of both the spiral prominence and Reissner's membrane (Fig. 1c).

In situ hybridization in the vestibular labyrinth suggested that pendrin mRNA is expressed in non-sensory cells [8]. Using confocal immunocytochemistry on cryosections, we observed strong expression of the pendrin protein in the apical membrane of vestibular transitional cells in the utricle and ampullae (Fig. 1g,1h,1i). Dual labeling with KCNQ1 demonstrated that pendrin expression was clearly limited to vestibular transitional cells and did not extend to other non-sensory cells such as vestibular dark cells, which were clearly identified by the expression of KCNQ1 and KCNE1 in their apical membranes.

The onset of pendrin expression during development of the mouse inner ear has been determined to be embryonic day (ED) 13 [14]. Morphologically detectable differences in the inner ears of Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice become evident as early as ED 15, when Slc26a4-/- mice start to develop an enlarged endolymphatic space that persists into adulthood [14]. Interestingly, sensory hair cells in the cochlea appear normal until postnatal day (PD) 7 but show clear evidence of degeneration by PD 15 [14]. These observations suggest that the cochlear environment supports the survival of sensory hair cells in spite of the enlargement of the endolymphatic duct. A normal endolymphatic K+ concentration, which is critical for hair cell survival [20], is established at PD 3 [21] and may persist in Slc26a4-/- at least until PD 7. The time period between PD 7 and 15 is the time when the endocochlear potential develops at the onset of hearing [22]. We hypothesized that a lack of a normal endocochlear potential or an alteration of the endolymphatic K+ concentration could account for deafness in Slc26a4-/- mice. Measurements revealed that the endocochlear potential was absent but that the endolymphatic K+ concentration was normal in adult Slc26a4-/- (Fig. 2a). No significant differences between Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice were found in perilymphatic (Fig. 2a) or plasma K+ concentrations (Slc26a4+/+, 4.9 ± 0.3 mM, n = 6; Slc26a4-/-, 5.1 ± 0.3 mM, n = 6). These observations suggest that a primary event leading to deafness in Slc26a4-/- mice, and potentially in patients suffering from Pendred syndrome, is the loss of the endocochlear potential. Degeneration of hair cells is probably a response to the loss of the endocochlear potential.

Figure 2

Potential, K+ concentrations and pigmentation of stria vascularis in Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice. a: Endocochlear potential and K+ concentrations in endolymph and perilymph at the apex (A) and base (B) of the cochlea. Numbers adjacent to symbols denote number of measurements. b-d: Pigmentation of stria vascularis in Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice. b: View of stria vascularis through the bony capsule of the cochlea. OW, oval window, RW, round window; arrows, stria vascularis. c-d: Whole-mounts of stria vascularis isolated from age-matched mice. c: Laser-scanning images, bar = 10 μm, d: Quantification of pigmentation based on optical density.

The endocochlear potential is generated by stria vascularis in the lateral wall of the cochlea [17,23]. The potential is generated across the basal cell barrier of stria vascularis by the K+ channel KCNJ10 located in intermediate cells [24], which are connected to basal cells by a high density of gap junctions [25]. Marginal cells of stria vascularis, which form the barrier toward endolymph, transport K+ from the intrastrial space into endolymph and keep the K+ concentration low adjacent to the KCNJ10 K+ channel [26]. To determine the cause of the loss of the endocochlear potential in Slc26a4-/- mice, we first determined whether intermediate cells are present in stria vascularis, since a loss of intermediate cells is known to lead to a loss of the endocochlear potential [27,28]. Intermediate cells of stria vascularis were visualized by their pigmentation. Pigmentation was present in stria vascularis of Slc26a4-/- mice (Fig. 2b), which suggests that intermediate cells are present. Interestingly, pigmentation of stria vascularis was much stronger in Slc26a4-/- than in Slc26a4+/+ mice.

To determine in greater detail the cause of the loss of the endocochlear potential in Slc26a4-/- mice, we isolated total RNA from stria vascularis and spiral ganglia of young (1–4 month) Slc26a4+/+ and both young and old (~12 month) Slc26a4-/- mice, assessed amounts of isolated tissues by quantification of 18S rRNA, and quantified the expression of KCNJ10 mRNA. Quantities of stria vascularis isolated from these different mice were similar, since no significant differences were found in the numbers of 18S rRNA molecules (log(rRNA) = 9.46 ± 0.08, n = 17, pooled data). In contrast, quantities of spiral ganglia isolated from young and old Slc26a4-/- mice (log(rRNA) = 9.04 ± 0.18, n = 4 and 9.29 ± 0.15, n = 6) were significantly smaller than in Slc26a4+/+ mice (log(rRNA) = 9.48 ± 0.19, n = 7), consistent with morphometric data (see below). Expression of KCNJ10 mRNA was normal in stria vascularis and spiral ganglia of young Slc26a4-/- mice but significantly reduced in old Slc26a4-/- mice (Fig. 3). Quantifications of KCNQ1 and KCNQ4 mRNA were used to assess possible cross-contamination between the stria vascularis and spiral ganglia preparations based on the assumptions that (1) KCNQ1 is expressed in cells of the stria vascularis but not the spiral ganglia preparation and (2) KCNQ4 is expressed in cells of the spiral ganglia but not the stria vascularis preparation. The number of KCNQ1 mRNA molecules in stria vascularis was 24-fold greater than in spiral ganglia, and the number of KCNQ4 mRNA molecules in spiral ganglia was 5-fold greater than in stria vascularis. These observations validate our measurements of KCNJ10 and KCNQ1 by demonstrating that the microdissected preparations of stria vascularis and spiral ganglia were 98% and 78% pure, respectively.

Figure 3

Quantification of KCNJ10 and KCNQ1 mRNA expression in stria vascularis and spiral ganglia of Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice. a: Electropherogram of total RNA isolated from stria vascularis microdissected from one mouse. The amount of total RNA was obtained from the total integral (shaded) and the amount of 18S rRNA was obtained from the integral of the 18S peak. Sharp peaks representing 18S and 28S rRNA demonstrate the high quality of RNA. Insert: Genotype of Slc26a4-/- mice was verified by the observation of one or few very large rhomboedric otoconia in the utricular macula (arrow). A, crista ampullaris; U, utricular macula. Scale bar: 100 μm. b: Example of real-time RT-PCR data used for quantification of 18S, KCNJ10, KCNQ1 and KCNQ4. Known quantities of 18S rRNA were used to calibrate the threshold. SV, stria vascularis; SG, spiral ganglia. c: Quantification of KCNJ10 and KCNQ1 mRNA in young Slc26a4+/+ and young and old Slc26a4-/- mice.

The presence of KCNJ10 mRNA in stria vascularis of Slc26a4-/- mice supports the finding that intermediate cells are present. Expression of the KCNJ10 protein was assessed in young Slc26a4-/- mice by confocal immunocytochemistry. Interestingly, expression of the KCNJ10 protein was absent in stria vascularis but normal in spiral ganglia (Fig. 4). The absence of the KCNJ10 K+ channel in stria vascularis is sufficient to explain the loss of the endocochlear potential [17].

Figure 4

Protein localization of KCNJ10 in the cochlea of Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice. a: Overview of cochlea; bar = 100 μm. Compare to Fig. 1a to note the enlarged scala media and the distended Reissner's membrane. b-c: Detail of lateral wall and spiral ganglia (insert); main bar: 10 μm, insert: 5 μm. Expression of KCNJ10 in Slc26a4-/- mice was absent in stria vascularis but unchanged in spiral ganglion cells. RM, Reissner's membrane, SV, stria vascularis; SP, spiral prominence; SL, spiral ligament; LIM, spiral limbus; SG, spiral ganglion.

Histological evaluation of cryosections revealed an enlargement of scala media with a large bulging of Reissner's membrane and an apparent degeneration of the organ of Corti, as described earlier [14]. Tissue height of stria vascularis was normal (Fig. 5), consistent with the similar numbers of 18S rRNA molecules in isolated preparations (see above). The absence of a change in tissue height is consistent with the presence of intermediate cells [28]. Further, we observed an apparent loss of tissue masses in areas that are normally occupied primarily by type I and II fibrocytes. Spiral prominence in Slc26a4-/- mice was less prominent, spiral ligament thinner and spiral limbus flatter (Fig. 5). The observation that tissue masses were lost in the spiral limbus region is consistent with the finding of a reduced number of 18S rRNA molecules in the spiral ganglia preparation (see above). In addition, we observed an apparent degeneration of stria vascularis, including an increase in pigmentation and an irregular pattern of the tight junctions of marginal cells (Fig. 2c, 6,7). Tight junctions were visualized by F-actin expression. Marginal cells appeared to form a continuous layer.

Figure 5

Morphometric analysis of cochlear tissue masses in Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice. a: locations of measurements. Thickness of stria vascularis (SV) was obtained as average of three distance measurements perpendicular to the surface of marginal cells. Thickness of spiral prominence (SP) was measured perpendicular to a tangential line (dashed) that connects the surface of the outer sulcus (OS) with the basal layer of stria vascularis. Thickness of spiral ligament (SL) was measured perpendicular to the tangential line as distance between the surface of spiral prominence and the interface between spiral ligament and bone (B). Thickness of spiral limbus (LIM) was obtained perpendicular to the surface of the bone as a tangential line that touches the inner sulcus (IS) and reaches from the surface of the spiral limbus to the interface between spiral limbus connective tissue and bone. b: Summary. Data from 7–8 animals contributed to each column.

Figure 6

Analysis of marginal and basal cell barriers by in Slc26a4-/- mice. Tight junctions were visualized by F actin. Whole-mounts of stria vascularis were viewed either from the basal cell side (a-f) or from the marginal cell side (g-l). Bright field images verify that the same area was viewed from either side (b and h). Colored bright field images were mixed with images of F actin staining to indicate the position of pigment granules (d, j, f and l). Focus was varied to either visualize the marginal cell barrier (SMC, c-d and i-j) or the basal cell barrier (BC, e-f and k-l). Both the marginal cell (e-f) and the basal cell barrier (i-f) appeared to be intact. It was critical for this finding that pigmentation did not block the path of the laser. Blockage of the laser by pigmentation produces the untrue impression of a discontinuous marginal cell barrier (c-d) or basal cell barrier (k-l). Comparison of images is aided by marking a significant area with a star. Bars = 10 μm.

Figure 7

Analysis of marginal and basal cell barriers in Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice. Tight junctions were visualized by F actin in whole-mounts of stria vascularis. Bright field images were taken to evaluate pigmentation (a, d and g). Note the intact marginal cell (b) and basal cell (c) barriers in Slc26a4+/+ mice. Minimal pigmentation of Slc26a4+/+ mice did not compromise F actin localization. Whole-mounts of stria vascularis from Slc26a4-/- mice were viewed either from the basal cell side (e-f) or from the marginal cell side (h-i). Bright field images verify that the same area was viewed from either side (d and g). Focus was varied to either visualize the marginal cell barrier (SMC, b,e and h) or the basal cell barrier (BC, c,f and i). Both the basal cell (f) and the marginal cell (h) barriers appeared to be intact. Blockage of the laser by pigmentation produces the untrue impression of 'holes' in the marginal cell barrier (e) or basal cell barrier (i). Comparison of images is aided by marking three significant areas with colored stars. Bars = 10 μm.

Pendrin-expressing surface epithelial cells in the spiral prominence region are located in an area where basal cells, which are interconnected by tight junctions, form additional tight junctions with surface epithelial cells [29]. A discontinuity of this complex junction in Slc26a4-/- mice would explain the absence of the endocochlear potential. To evaluate the presence of this connection, we determined by confocal immunocytochemistry the expression of ZO-1 and of F-actin, which associate with tight junction complexes. ZO-1 and F-actin expression revealed a continuous layer of basal cells, including a junction of basal cells with surface epithelial cells in Slc26a4-/- mice, as observed in normal mice (Fig. 1c,1d,1e,1f,6,7). These observations make it unlikely that the primary cause of the loss of the endocochlear potential is a compromise in the basal cell barrier.

The observation that endolymphatic and perilymphatic K+ concentrations were normal in Slc26a4-/- mice suggests that stria vascularis was able to secrete K+ in spite of the apparent signs of degeneration. The rate of K+ secretion necessary to maintain endolymphatic K+ concentration, however, may be less than necessary in Slc26a4+/+ mice given the reduced numbers of sensory hair cells, which provide a major pathway for K+ exit from endolymph [30,31]. In order to substantiate the view that stria vascularis in Slc26a4-/- secretes K+, we measured the magnitude of the bumetanide-sensitive current exiting stria vascularis across the apical membrane of strial marginal cells and determined the expression of the proteins KCNQ1, KCNE1 and SLC12A2, which are essential for K+ secretion [20,32,33], and of GJB2 (Cx26), which is thought to contribute to K+ cycling [23]. K+ secretion is known to be sensitive to 10-5 M bumetanide, a loop-diuretic that inhibits the Na+/2Cl-/K+ cotransporter SLC12A2 [26]. Bumetanide-sensitive currents were found in both Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice although the magnitude of the current was significantly smaller in Slc26a4-/- mice (22 ± 6 μA/cm2, n = 4 versus 14 ± 2 μA/cm2, n = 4). KCNQ1 and KCNE1, subunits of the secretory K+ channel, were co-localized in the apical membrane of strial marginal cells; the Na+/2Cl-/K+ cotransporter SLC12A2, which is located in the basolateral membrane of strial marginal cells, was found in stria vascularis; and the gap junction protein GJB2 was found in spiral ligament of Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice (Fig. 8). Co-localization of KCNQ1 and KCNE1 proteins was also observed in vestibular dark cells (Fig. 1i). Expression of KCNQ1 protein in stria vascularis of Slc26a4-/- mice is consistent with the finding of KCNQ1 mRNA expression (Fig. 3). These observations make it unlikely that the primary cause of the loss of the endocochlear potential is a compromise of K+ secretion by strial marginal cells or a compromise of gap junction mediated K+ cycling.

Figure 8

Protein localization of KCNQ1, KCNE1, SLC12A2 and GJB2 in the cochlear lateral wall of Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice. a-f: bars: 10 μm. SMC, strial marginal cells; SV, stria vascularis; BC, basal cells; SL, spiral ligament.

Conclusions

We described locations of pendrin expression in the cochlea and vestibular labyrinth and detected normal endolymphatic K+ concentrations in spite of an enlargement of this fluid compartment. We found that Slc26a4-/- mice lack the endocochlear potential because they do not express KCNJ10 protein. Intermediate cells protect stria vascularis by converting CO2 to HCO3 - and by detoxifying free radicals (Fig. 9). CO2 and free radicals are generated by the large numbers of mitochondria in the metabolically highly active strial marginal cells. Intermediate cells employ carbonic anhydrase to convert CO2 to HCO3 - [18,19] and catalase to detoxify free radicals. To protect themselves from free radical damage, intermediate cells generate glutathione and melanin pigment [34-37]. It is conceivable that loss of pendrin, which may secrete HCO3 - into endolymph, results in an accumulation of HCO3 - and an alkalinization of the intrastrial spaces. This extracellular alkalinization may enhance free radical stress, since it may inhibit the uptake of cysteine and thereby limit production of the protective glutathione [38]. Support for the hypothesis of enhanced free radical stress comes from the observed hyperpigmentation in mice lacking pendrin. Strial hyperpigmentation has also been observed in other conditions that are associated with free radical stress, such as acoustic trauma [37]. Alterations in the cytosolic pH in conjunction with free radical stress may lead to the loss of KCNJ10 protein expression in strial intermediate cells. Function and expression of other K+ channels has been shown to be controlled by the cytosolic pH and free radicals, which encode the metabolic state of the cell [39]. Suppression of the KCNJ10 K+ channel in strial intermediate cells, which is essential for the generation of the endocochlear potential, is probably the direct cause of deafness in Slc26a4-/- mice and patients suffering from Pendred syndrome.

Figure 9

Model for the loss of KCNJ10 in the absence of pendrin expression in stria vascularis. Cys, cysteine, Glu, glutamate, Gly, glycine, CA, carbonic anhydrase, GST, glutathione-S-transferase, GSH, glutathione.

Competing interests

None declared.

Authors' contributions

PW designed and coordinated the immunocytochemical, morphometrical and molecular biological experiments. EMI and BA carried out confocal immunocytochemistry on cryosections. SJ and SVJ carried out confocal microscopy on whole-mounts of stria vascularis. SVJ and RJM carried out quantitative RT-PCR. DCM designed and coordinated electrophysiological experiments. TW carried out measurements of the endocochlear potential and the endolymphatic K+ concentration. JHL carried out current measurements on strial marginal cells. SMW, LAE, IER and EDG provided the mice and the pendrin-specific antibody. PW and DCM conceived the study. PW wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Pre-publication history

The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:



Acknowledgements

This work was supported by NIH-R01-DC01098 (PW), NIH-R01-DC00212 (DCM), NIH-R01-DK52935 (SMW) and Core facilities funded by NIH-P20-RR017686 (Confocal Microfluorometry and Microscopy Core, Molecular Biology Core) are gratefully acknowledged.Regulation of Muscle Fiber Type and Running Endurance by PPARδ

Abstract

Endurance exercise training can promote an adaptive muscle fiber transformation and an increase of mitochondrial biogenesis by triggering scripted changes in gene expression. However, no transcription factor has yet been identified that can direct this process. We describe the engineering of a mouse capable of continuous running of up to twice the distance of a wild-type littermate. This was achieved by targeted expression of an activated form of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor δ (PPARδ) in skeletal muscle, which induces a switch to form increased numbers of type I muscle fibers. Treatment of wild-type mice with PPARδ agonist elicits a similar type I fiber gene expression profile in muscle. Moreover, these genetically generated fibers confer resistance to obesity with improved metabolic profiles, even in the absence of exercise. These results demonstrate that complex physiologic properties such as fatigue, endurance, and running capacity can be molecularly analyzed and manipulated.

Introduction

Skeletal muscle fibers are generally classified as type I (oxidative/slow) or type II (glycolytic/fast) fibers. They display marked differences in respect to contraction, metabolism, and susceptibility to fatigue. Type I fibers are mitochondria-rich and mainly use oxidative metabolism for energy production, which provides a stable and long-lasting supply of ATP, and thus are fatigue-resistant. Type II fibers comprise three subtypes, IIa, IIx, and IIb. Type IIb fibers have the lowest levels of mitochondrial content and oxidative enzymes, rely on glycolytic metabolism as a major energy source, and are susceptible to fatigue, while the oxidative and contraction functions of type IIa and IIx lie between type I and IIb (Booth and Thomason 1991; Berchtold et al. 2000; Olson and Williams 2000). Adult skeletal muscle shows plasticity and can undergo conversion between different fiber types in response to exercise training or modulation of motoneuron activity (Booth and Thomason 1991, Jarvis et al. 1996; Pette 1998; Olson and Williams 2000; Hood 2001). This conversion of muscle fiber from type IIb to type IIa and type I is likely to be mediated by a calcium signaling pathway that involves calcineurin, calmodulin-dependent kinase, and the transcriptional cofactor Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1α (PGC-1α) (Naya et al. 2000; Olson and Williams 2000; Lin et al. 2002; Wu et al. 2002). However, the targeted transcriptional factors directly responsible for reprogramming the fiber-specific contractile and metabolic genes remain to be identified.

Muscle fiber specification appears to be associated with obesity and diabetes. For instance, rodents that gain the most weight on high-fat diets possess fewer type I fibers (Abou et al. 1992). In obese patients, skeletal muscle has been observed to have reduced oxidative capacity, increased glycolytic capacity, and a decreased percentage of type I fibers (Hickey et al. 1995; Tanner et al. 2002). Similar observations have been made in type 2 diabetic patients (Lillioja et al. 1987; Hickey et al. 1995). Recently, it has been shown that increasing oxidative fibers can lead to improved insulin action and reduced adipocyte size (Luquet et al. 2003; Ryder et al. 2003).

We have previously established that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) δ is a major transcriptional regulator of fat burning in adipose tissue through activation of enzymes associated with long-chain fatty-acid β-oxidation (Wang et al. 2003). Although PPARδ is the predominant PPAR isoform present in skeletal muscle, its in vivo function has not been determined. Our current study uncovers PPARδ as the first transcription factor able to drive the formation of functional type I muscle fibers, whose activation entrains complex pathways both enhancing physical performance and creating a state of obesity resistance.

Results

Activation of PPARδ Leads to Muscle Fiber Transformation

A role of PPARδ in muscle fiber was suggested by its enhanced expression—at levels 10-fold and 50-fold greater than PPARα and γ isoforms, respectively (unpublished data). An examination of PPARδ in different muscle fibers reveals a significantly higher level in type I muscle (soleus) relative to type II–rich muscle (extensor digitorum longus) or type I and type II mixed muscle (gastrocnemius) (Figure 1A); this expression pattern closely resembles that of PGC-1α (Lin et al. 2002). A similar pattern but with more pronounced differences was found at the protein level (Figure 1B).

To directly assess the role of activation of PPARδ in control of muscle fiber plasticity and mitochondrial biogenesis, we generated mice expressing a transgene in which the 78-amino-acid VP16 activation domain was fused to the N-terminus of full-length PPARδ, under control of the 2.2-kb human α-skeletal actin promoter. In agreement with the previous characterization of this promoter (Brennan and Hardeman 1993; Clapham et al. 2000), the VP16-PPARδ transgene was selectively expressed in skeletal muscle, with 10-fold less in the heart (Figure 1C). Among different types of muscle fibers, the levels of VP16-PPARδ expression appeared to be similar (unpublished data). As shown in Figure 1D for gastrocnemius muscle, VP16-PPARδ fusion protein was produced at a level similar to that of endogenous PPARδ in wild-type littermates. Interestingly, the level of endogenous muscle PPARδ protein in the transgenic mice was much higher than in the control littermates. The substantial increase of endogenous PPARδ may have been caused by a switch to type I fiber (see below), which intrinsically expresses higher levels of PPARδ (Figure 1A and 1B).

Type I muscle can be readily distinguished from type II or mixed muscle by its red color, because of its high concentration of myoglobin, a protein typically expressed in oxidative muscle fibers. We found that muscles in the transgenic mice appeared redder (Figure 2A), which is particularly evident in the mixed type I/II fibers of the hindlimb (Figure 2B). Indeed, metachromatic staining revealed a substantial muscle fiber transformation (Figure 2C). In gastrocnemius muscle, we estimated that there was a 2-fold increase of type I fibers. A diagnostic component of oxidative fibers is their high myoglobin and mitochondrial content, which is supported by the mRNA analysis shown in Figure 3A. In addition to myoglobin, mitochondrial components for electron transfer (cytochrome c and cytochrome c oxidase [COX] II and IV) and fatty-acid β-oxidation enzymes were elevated (Figure 3A; unpublished data). These effects appear to be direct consequences of PPARδ activation, as levels of PGC-1α, a coactivator involved in muscle fiber switch and mitochondrial biogenesis (Wu et al. 1999; Lehman et al. 2000; Lin et al. 2002), remained unchanged. Southern blot analysis detected a substantially higher copy number of the mitochondrial genome–encoded COXII DNA in the transgenic mice (Figure 3B). Mitochondrial DNA was increased 2.3-fold in gastrocnemius muscle of the transgenic mice (Figure 3C). These results reveal a marked stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and further support the idea that there is a muscle fiber switch. This conclusion was also confirmed by Western blot analysis. As shown in Figure 3D, the characteristic type I fiber proteins, such as myoglobin and cytochrome c and b, were significantly increased. More importantly, the specialized contraction protein troponin I (slow) of type I fiber was robustly induced; this was accompanied by a marked reduction of the specialized contraction protein troponin I (fast) of type II fiber, indicating a high degree of fiber transformation. We next examined whether acute activation of endogenous PPARδ would induce similar target genes. In agreement with the chronic effects in the transgenic mice, we found that, after treatment of wild-type C57B6J mice with the PPARδ-specific agonist GW501516 for only 10 d, genes for slow fiber contractile proteins, mitochondrial biogenesis, and β-oxidation were all upregulated (Figure 3E). This indicates that rapid, systematic, and coordinated changes of muscle fiber properties toward type I can be achieved by activation of the endogenous PPARδ pathway.

Muscle Fiber Switch by PPARδ Protects Against Obesity

A number of previous studies have shown that obese individuals have fewer oxidative fibers, implying that the presence of oxidative fibers alone may play a part in obesity resistance. To test this possibility, we fed the transgenic mice and their wild-type littermates with a high-fat diet for 97 d. Although the initial body weights of the two groups were very similar, the transgenic mice had gained less than 50% at day 47, and only one-third at day 97, of the weight gained by the wild-type animals (Figure 4A). The transgenic mice displayed significantly higher oxygen consumption on the high-fat diet than the control littermates (unpublished data). By the end of this experiment, the control littermates became obese, whereas the transgenic mice still maintained a normal body weight and fat mass composition (Figure 4A). A histological analysis of inguinal fat pad revealed a much smaller cell size in the transgenic mice (Figure 4B), due to the increased muscle oxidative capacity. While there was no significant difference in intramuscular glycogen content, the triglyceride content was much less in the transgenic mice (Figure 4C and 4D), which may explain their improved glucose tolerance (Figure 4E). We also placed wild-type C57BJ6 mice on the high-fat diet and treated them with either vehicle or the PPARδ agonist GW501516 for 2 mo. GW501516 produced a sustained induction of genes for type I muscle fibers; this, at least in part, resulted in an only 30% gain in body weight, a dramatically reduced fat mass accumulation, and improved glucose tolerance, compared to the vehicle-treated group (Figure 5). Thus, muscle fiber conversion by stimulation with the PPARδ agonist or the activated transgene has a protective role against obesity.

Activation of PPARδ Enhances Physical Performance

Muscle oxidative capacity is a crucial factor for determining endurance and fatigue. Indeed, type I fibers adaptively generated through exercise training are considered to be fatigue resistant. However, whether the type I fibers generated molecularly via PPARδ expression can contribute to enhanced performance in the absence of previous training is unclear. In fact, the consequence of genetically induced fiber switch on running capacity has to our knowledge never been evaluated. We thus compared exercise performance between untrained, body-weight-matched transgenic and wild-type littermates. Mice were run on oxygen-infused, enclosed treadmills until exhaustion. Strikingly, the running time and distance the transgenic mice were able to sustain were increased by 67% and 92%, respectively (Figure 6A; also see Videos S1 and S2). The transgenic mice ran about 1 h longer than the controls, which translates to nearly a kilometer further. No significant differences in muscle mass (unpublished data) and daily activity (total counts of activity per hour: 1618 ± 209 for transgenic versus 1987 ± 301 for wild-type, p > 0.35, n = 4) were observed between the transgenic and control mice. Thus, the remarkable increase in endurance is the physiologic manifestation of muscle fiber transformation. This suggests that genetically directed muscle fiber switch is physiologically and functionally relevant. In addition, we looked at what effect the absence of PPARδ function has on exercise endurance. In the treadmill test, the PPARδ-null mice could sustain only 38% of the running time and 34% of the distance of their age- and weight-matched wild-type counterparts (Figure 6B). These results further support a role for PPARδ in enhancement of physical performance.

Discussion

Our data reveal that a PPARδ-mediated transcriptional pathway can regulate muscle fiber specification, enabling the generation of a strain of mice with a “long-distance running” phenotype. We show that targeted expression of an activated form of PPARδ produces profound and coordinated increases in oxidation enzymes, mitochondrial biogenesis, and production of specialized type I fiber contractile proteins—the three hallmarks for muscle fiber type switching (Figure 6C). While induction of muscle oxidation enzymes by PPARδ has been seen both in vivo and in vitro (Muoio et al. 2002; Dressel et al. 2003; Luquet et al. 2003; Tanaka et al. 2003; Wang et al. 2003), its effects shown here on muscle fiber switching are unexpected. These progressive changes in oxidative capacity in conjunction with eventual changes in type I muscle fiber lead to a dramatically improved exercise profile and protection against obesity. This does not solely depend on achieving a directed muscle fiber type switch but also requires all the associated changes in neural innervation, motor neuron function, and peripheral metabolic adaptation to enable a new integrated physiological response. Accordingly, activation of muscle PPARδ essentially recapitulates the effects of exercise training even in the absence of training itself. To our knowledge, this has not been directly described for any other transcriptional factor.

The muscle phenotypes described here are remarkably similar to those of transgenic mice expressing either calcineurin, calmodulin-dependent kinase, or PGC-1α (Naya et al. 2000; Lin et al. 2002; Wu et al. 2002), indicating that PPARδ could be one of the hypothetical downstream transcription factors of these pathways. It is important to note that, from our ligand and gain-of-function transgenic studies, PPARδ needs to be activated in order to direct the muscle fiber switch. Indeed, in a recent report by Luquet et al. (2003), simple overexpression of wild-type PPARδ in muscle was found not to be sufficient to promote a fiber switch or obesity resistance, although certain oxidation enzymes were increased. This supports the model in Figure 6C that the activating signal or ligand, but not the receptor, is limiting. Thus, PPARδ activation, rather than merely an increase of PPARδ levels, is an essential element for fiber switching and its associated functional manifestations. How might endogenous PPARδ become activated naturally by exercise training? First, it is possible that exercise generates or increases endogenous ligands for PPARδ as tissues are undergoing substantial increases in fatty-acid internalization and burning. Fatty acids and their metabolites can activate PPARδ. A second model is that exercise may induce expression of PGC-1α (Goto et al. 2000) and thereby activate PPARδ. This is consistent with previous work in which we have shown that PGC-1α physically associates with PPARδ in muscle tissue and can powerfully activate it even in the absence of ligands (Wang et al. 2003). Alternatively, PPARδ may be activated by a distal upstream signaling component such as a kinase cascade. Further dissecting the interactions between PPARδ and its regulatory components will be necessary to fully understand the molecular basis of muscle fiber determination pertinent to exercise training.

Skeletal muscle is a major site to regulate whole-body fatty-acid and glucose metabolism. We show that mice with increased oxidative fibers are resistant to high-fat-induced obesity and glucose intolerance. Moreover, ligand studies provide compelling evidence that activation of endogenous PPARδ can produce similar effects. Might PPARδ have any beneficial effects on glucose metabolism in the lean condition? This has not been explored; however, insulin resistance in the elderly is confined mostly to skeletal muscle and may be due to reduction of mitochondrial number and/or function (Petersen et al. 2003). The ability of PPARδ to stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative function suggests that PPARδ could be important for control of insulin resistance during normal aging. Together, these data indicate that PPARδ and its ligands comprise a key molecular switch to regulate muscle fiber specification, obesity resistance, insulin sensitivity, and, most surprisingly, physical endurance. This work demonstrates that complex physiologic properties such as fatigue, endurance, and running capacity can be genetically manipulated.

Materials and Methods



Animals.

The transactivation domain (78 amino acid residues, corresponding to residues 413–490) of VP16 was fused in frame with the N-terminus of mouse PPARδ. The VP16-PPARδ fusion cDNA was placed downstream of the human α-skeletal actin promoter (Brennan and Hardeman 1993), and upstream of the SV40 intron/poly(A) sequence. The transgene was purified and injected into C57BL/6J × CBA F1 zygotes. Transgenic mice were backcrossed with C57BL/6J for two generations. Wild-type littermates were used as controls throughout the study. On normal chow diet, the transgenic mice and control littermates used here had similar body weights. PPARδ-null mice were previously generated (Barak et al. 2002). Mice were fed either a standard chow with 4% (w/w) fat content (Harlan Teklad, Harlan, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States) or a high-fat diet containing 35% (w/w) fat content (product F3282, Bioserv, Frenchtown, New Jersey, United States) as indicated. For ligand experiments, we synthesized the GW501516 compound and mice were orally gavaged daily (10 mg/kg or vehicle alone).

Gene expression analysis and physiological studies

Mouse EST clones were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, Virginia, United States), verified by sequencing, and used as Northern probes. Antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, California, United States). Total muscle protein extracts (Lin et al. 2002) and nuclear proteins (Wang et al. 2003) were prepared as described.

Prior to the exercise performance test, the mice were accustomed to the treadmill (Columbus Instruments, Columbus, Ohio, United States) with a 5-min run at 7 m/min once per day for 2 d. The exercise test regimen was 10 m/min for the first 60 min, followed by 1 m/min increment increases at 15-min intervals. Exhaustion was defined when mice were unable to avoid repetitive electrical shocks.

Muscle fiber typing and mitochondrial DNA isolation

Muscle fiber typing was essentially performed using metachromatic dye–ATPase methods as described (Ogilvie and Feeback 1990). Muscle mitochondria were isolated (Scholte et al. 1997). Mitochondrial DNA was prepared and analyzed on 1% agarose gel.

Statistical analysis

Number of mice for each group used in experiments is indicated in figure legends. Values are presented as mean ± SEM. A two-tailed Student's t test was used to calculate p-values.

Supporting Information

Video S1

Beginning of Running Test

This video shows the exercise performance of a representative of the transgenic mice (right chamber) and a representative of wild-type control littermates (left chamber) on the treadmill 15 min into the exercise challenge.

(52.4 MB MOV).

Click here for additional data file.

Video S2

Running Test 90 Min Later

This video shows the exercise performance of a representative of the transgenic mice (right chamber) and a representative of wild-type control littermates (left chamber) on the treadmill 90 min into the exercise challenge.

(41.7 MB MOV).

Click here for additional data file.

Acknowledgements

We thank Dr. M. Downes for providing the α-skeletal actin promoter; Dr. G. D. Barish for comments on the manuscript; M.A. Lawrence for histology; Dr. S. Pfaff for the use of microscopes and photographic equipment; M. Lieberman and K.L. Schnoeker for photography; J.M. Shelton for advice on fiber staining; and E. Stevens and E. Ong for administrative assistance. YXW was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from California Tobacco-Related Disease Research Program. JH was supported by the BK21 program, Ministry of Education, Korea. HK was supported by grant M1–0311-00–0145 from the Molecular and Cellular BioDiscovery Research Program, Ministry of Science and Technology, Korea. RME is an Investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies and March of Dimes Chair in Molecular and Developmental Biology. This work was supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Hillblom Foundation.

Abbreviations

COX - cytochrome c oxidase

mCPT1 - muscle carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1

PGC-1α - Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1α

PPAR - peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor

UCP - uncoupling protein

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Expression of Endogenous PPARδ and VP16-PPARδ Transgene in Muscle

(A) Pooled RNA isolated from various muscles of five wild-type male C57B6 mice was hybridized with indicated probes. EDL, extensor digitorum longus; Gastro, gastrocnemius.

(B) Pooled nuclear proteins (15 μg/lane) isolated from muscles of five wild-type male C57B6 were probed with anti-PPARδ antibody. RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is shown as a loading control.

(C) Expression of the VP16-PPARδ transgene in various tissues. 10 μg of total RNA from each tissue was hybridized with a VP16 cDNA probe. Gastrocnemius muscle was used here.

(D) Nuclear proteins (15 μg/lane) isolated from gastrocnemius muscle of the transgenic mice (TG) and the wild-type littermates (WT) were probed with indicated antibodies. The upper, nonspecific band that cross-reacted with the anti-PPARδ antibody serves a loading control.

Figure 2

Increased Oxidative Type I Fibers in the Transgenic Mice

(A and B) Muscles in transgenic mice (TG) are redder than those in wild-type mice (WT).

(C) Metachromatic staining of the type II plantaris muscle. Type I fibers are stained dark blue.

Figure 3

Activation of PPARδ Induces Genes Typical for Type I Fibers and Promotes Mitochondrial Biogenesis

(A) Total RNA (10 μg/lane) prepared from gastrocnemius muscle of transgenic (TG) and wild-type (WT) littermates was probed with indicated probes. The fold increase of induction of each gene is shown.

(B) Total genomic DNA (10 μg/lane) prepared from gastrocnemius muscle was digested with Nco1 and subjected to Southern analysis with COXII (mitochondrial genome–encoded) and MCIP1 (nuclear genome–encoded) DNA probes.

(C) Equal amounts of gastrocnemius muscle were collected from both transgenic mice and control littermates. Total mitochondrial DNA was isolated and separated on 1% agarose gel. The relative abundance of mitochondrial DNA in transgenic and wild-type mice is presented.

(D) Western blot analysis of muscle fiber markers and mitochondrial components. Each lane was loaded with 80 μg of total gastrocnemius muscle extracts.

(E) Wild-type C57B6 mice were treated with vehicle or PPARδ agonist GW501516 for 10 d. Total RNA (10 μg/lane) prepared from the gastrocnemius muscle was probed with indicated probes.

Figure 4

Resistance to High-Fat-Induced Obesity in the Transgenic Mice

(A) Seven-week-old transgenic (TG) and wild-type (WT) littermates (n = 5–6 for each group) were fed with a high-fat diet for 97 d. Left panel shows net body weight gain, which was calculated for individual mice and then averaged. Right panel shows the body weights before (Day 0) and after (Day 97) high-fat feeding.

(B) Histology of inguinal fat pad in the transgenic and wild-type littermates under a high-fat diet for 2 mo.

(C and D) Intramuscular glycogen content (C) and triglyceride content (D) of mice in (A) after high-fat feeding (n = 6).

(E) Glucose tolerance test. Mice in (A) after high-fat feeding were fasted for 6 h and then injected with glucose at a concentration of 1g/kg body weight. Then blood glucose levels were measured periodically over 2 h (n = 6).

Figure 5

PPARδ Agonists Counteract Obesity Induced by High-Fat Diet

(A) Eleven-week-old wild-type C57B6 mice were fed a high-fat diet in combination with vehicle or GW501516 for 57 d. Total RNA (10 μg/lane) prepared from the gastrocnemius muscle was probed with indicated probes.

(B) Net body weight gain for mice in (A) after treatment was calculated for individual mice and averaged. Initial body weights were 28.54 ± 1.04 g for vehicle group (n = 5) and 28.86 ± 0.80 g for GW501516 group (n = 5).

(C) Various tissue weights for mice in (A) after treatment. ifat, inguinal fat; rdfat, reproductive fat; retrofat, retroperitoneal fat.

(D) Glucose tolerance test. Mice in (A) after treatment were fasted for 6 h and then injected with glucose at a concentration of 1g/kg body weight. Blood glucose levels were then measured periodically over 2 h.

Figure 6

PPARδ Regulates Exercise Endurance

(A) Enhanced exercise performance in the transgenic mice. Fourteen-week-old male transgenic and wild-type littermates with similar body weights (n = 4 for each group) were subjected to a forced treadmill exercise test.

(B) Compromised exercise performance in PPARδ-null mice. Two-month-old male PPARδ-null mice and wild-type controls with similar body weights (n = 6 for each group) were subjected to a forced treadmill exercise test.

(C) Functions of PPARδ in skeletal muscle.

Footnotes

Conflicts of interest. The authors have declared that no conflicts of interest exist.

Author contributions. YXW and RME conceived and designed the experiments. YXW, CLZ, RTY, MCN, and CRBO performed the experiments. YXW, CLZ, and RME analyzed the data. HKC, JH, and HK contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools. YXW and RME wrote the paper.

Academic Editor: Steve O'Rahilly, University of Cambridge

Citation: Wang YX, Zhang CL, Yu RT, Cho HK, Nelson MC, et al. (2004) Regulation of muscle fiber type and running endurance by PPARδ. PLoS Biol 2(10): e294.The phosphatidylserine receptor has essential functions during embryogenesis but not in apoptotic cell removal

Abstract

Background

Phagocytosis of apoptotic cells is fundamental to animal development, immune function and cellular homeostasis. The phosphatidylserine receptor (Ptdsr) on phagocytes has been implicated in the recognition and engulfment of apoptotic cells and in anti-inflammatory signaling. To determine the biological function of the phosphatidylserine receptor in vivo, we inactivated the Ptdsr gene in the mouse.

Results

Ablation of Ptdsr function in mice causes perinatal lethality, growth retardation and a delay in terminal differentiation of the kidney, intestine, liver and lungs during embryogenesis. Moreover, eye development can be severely disturbed, ranging from defects in retinal differentiation to complete unilateral or bilateral absence of eyes. Ptdsr -/- mice with anophthalmia develop novel lesions, with induction of ectopic retinal-pigmented epithelium in nasal cavities. A comprehensive investigation of apoptotic cell clearance in vivo and in vitro demonstrated that engulfment of apoptotic cells was normal in Ptdsr knockout mice, but Ptdsr-deficient macrophages were impaired in pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine signaling after stimulation with apoptotic cells or with lipopolysaccharide.

Conclusion

Ptdsr is essential for the development and differentiation of multiple organs during embryogenesis but not for apoptotic cell removal. Ptdsr may thus have a novel, unexpected developmental function as an important differentiation-promoting gene. Moreover, Ptdsr is not required for apoptotic cell clearance by macrophages but seems to be necessary for the regulation of macrophage cytokine responses. These results clearly contradict the current view that the phosphatidylserine receptor primarily functions in apoptotic cell clearance.

Background

Programmed cell death, or apoptosis, is required for the normal development of almost all multicellular organisms and is a physiological mechanism for controlling cell number; as a result, structures that are no longer needed are deleted during development and abnormal cells are eliminated [1,2]. Most of the cells produced during mammalian embryonic development undergo physiological cell death before the end of the perinatal period [3]. Apoptotic cells are removed rapidly and efficiently as intact cells or apoptotic bodies by professional phagocytes or by neighboring cells. This highly regulated process prevents the release of potentially noxious or immunogenic intracellular materials and constitutes the fate of most dying cells throughout the lifespan of an organism [4,5]. Phagocytosis of apoptotic cells is very distinct from other engulfment processes that result, for example, in the clearance of microorganisms, because engulfment of apoptotic cells triggers the secretion of potent anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive mediators, whereas pathogen recognition causes the release of pro-inflammatory signals [6].

Almost all cell types can recognize, respond to, and ingest apoptotic cells by using specific sets of phagocytic receptors that bind to specific ligands on apoptotic cells. Detailed genetic studies in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans have recently yielded evidence that basic phagocytic mechanisms and pathways for the recognition and engulfment of apoptotic cells are highly conserved throughout phylogeny [7,8]. In vertebrates, a number of receptors have been identified that can mediate phagocytosis of apoptotic cells. These include, for example, scavenger receptors and pattern recognition receptors such as CD36, SR-A and CD14, integrins such as the vitronectin receptor αvβ3, and members of the collectin family and their receptors CD91 and calreticulin [9-13]. The individual roles of these molecules in binding, phagocytosis or transduction of anti-inflammatory signals upon apoptotic cell recognition have not been well defined, however [5,6,14]. The importance of efficient mechanisms for apoptotic cell clearance in vivo is supported by the observation that autoimmune responses can be provoked in mice when key molecules for apoptotic cell recognition and uptake are missing. This has been reported for knockout mice lacking the complement protein C1q [15], for mice with a mutation in the tyrosine kinase receptor gene Mer [16] and, more recently, in mice lacking transglutaminase 2 or milk fat globule epidermal growth factor 8 (MFG-E8) [17,18].

The exposure of the phospholipid phosphatidylserine (PS) in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane of apoptotic cells has been described as one of the hallmarks of the induction of apoptosis and is considered to be one of the most important signals required for apoptotic cell recognition and removal [19]. A number of cell-surface and bridging molecules can interact with exposed PS on apoptotic cells. These include the serum proteins β2-glycoprotein 1 and protein S [20,21], the growth-arrest-specific gene product GAS-6 [22], complement activation products [23], the milk fat globule protein MFG-E8 [24], and annexin I [25]. In most cases the receptors on phagocytes that recognize these PS-bridging molecules have not been defined, but it has been reported that GAS-6 is a ligand for the tyrosine kinase receptor Mer and that MFG-E8 can bind to the vitronectin receptor αvβ3 [16,24]. Other molecules that bind PS with varying specificity are the lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1) and the scavenger receptors CD36 and CD68 (for review see [5] and references therein).

The best-characterized molecule so far that binds PS in a stereo-specific manner is the phosphatidylserine receptor (Ptdsr) [26]. In vitro, it has been shown that the Ptdsr can mediate the uptake of apoptotic cells and that such Ptdsr-mediated phagocytosis can be inhibited through addition of PS liposomes, the PS-binding molecule annexin V or an anti-Ptdsr antibody [26]. Moreover, the binding of Ptdsr to PS on apoptotic cells has been reported to be important for the release of anti-inflammatory mediators, including transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1), platelet-activating factor (PAF), and prostaglandin E2 [26,27]. These data supported the hypothesis that Ptdsr fulfils a role as a crucial signaling switch after the engagement of macrophages with apoptotic cells and is thereby fundamental for preventing local immune responses to apoptotic cells before their clearance [28].

Very recently, Ptdsr has been found in the cell nucleus. Its nuclear localization is mediated by five independent nuclear localization signals, each of which alone is capable of targeting Ptdsr to the cell nucleus [29]. Moreover, an additional study performed recently in Hydra showed an exclusively nuclear localization for the Ptdsr protein [30]. Most interestingly, the nuclear localization of Ptdsr in Hydra epithelial cells did not change upon phagocytosis of apoptotic cells. These reports challenge the original hypothesis, according to which Ptdsr is an exclusively transmembrane receptor for apoptotic cell recognition and anti-inflammatory signaling.

To examine further the role of Ptdsr in vivo, we performed gene-expression and gene-targeting studies in mice. A perinatally lethal phenotype was observed in Ptdsr-knockout mice, and Ptdsr-deficient embryos displayed multiple defects in tissue and organ differentiation. While this work was in progress, both Li et al. [31] and Kunisaki et al. [32] also reported the generation and phenotypic characterization of Ptdsr-knockout mice. Of note, although some of their results were confirmed in our study, we found a fundamentally different phenotype with regard to clearance of apoptotic cells. Moreover, our study revealed marked and unexpected findings in Ptdsr-deficient mice that are not related to apoptosis.

Results

Generation of Ptdsr-deficient mice

To investigate in vivo the functions of the phosphatidylserine receptor Ptdsr, we generated a null allele in the mouse by gene targeting (Figure 1a,1b,1c). In contrast to previously described Ptdsr-knockout mice [31,32], we used Bruce4 embryonic stem (ES) cells for gene targeting [33], thus generating a Ptdsr-null allele in a pure, isogenic C57BL/6J genetic background. The newly established knockout mouse line was named Ptdsrtm1Gbf (hereafter referred to as Ptdsr -/-). Heterozygous Ptdsr+/- mice were viable and fertile and showed no obvious abnormalities. Ptdsr +/- mice were intercrossed to generate homozygous Ptdsr-deficient mice. The absence of Ptdsr expression in Ptdsr -/- embryos was confirmed by RT-PCR (data not shown), and by northern and western blotting analyses (Figure 1d,e). Interbreeding of heterozygous mice showed that the mutation was lethal, since homozygous mutants were not detected in over 100 analyzed litters at weaning. To determine the stages of embryonic development affected by the Ptdsrtm1Gbf mutation, timed breedings were followed by PCR genotyping (Figure 1c) of embryos. We recovered fewer than the expected number of homozygous embryos from intercrosses of Ptdsr+/-mice. From a total of 1,031 embryos analyzed between gestational day (E) 9.5 and E18.5, 198 (19.2%) Ptdsr-deficient homozygous embryos were harvested, indicating that the introduced mutation is associated with a low rate of embryonic lethality in utero.

From E9.5 to E12.5, Ptdsr -/-  embryos were viable and of normal size. At E13.5 and thereafter, however, most Ptdsr -/-embryos showed morphological abnormalities (Table 1). All homozygous embryos harvested were growth-retarded from E13.5 onwards, had a pale appearance, and displayed multiple developmental dysmorphologies. These included various head and craniofacial malformations, such as exencephaly, cleft palate and abnormal head shape (Figure 1f,g). Gross inspection revealed that eye development was severely affected in 14.1% of homozygous embryos. The affected animals displayed a complete unilateral or bilateral absence of the eyes (Table 1) that was never detected in Ptdsr +/+ or Ptdsr +/- littermates. Furthermore, homozygous embryos harvested between E12.5 and E15.5 had subcutaneous edema (Figure 1f,g). Because we were able to recover Ptdsr -/- embryos until E18.5, we investigated whether Ptdsr-knockout mice could be born alive. Careful observation of timed matings allowed us to recover Ptdsr -/- neonates, but homozygous pups died during delivery or within minutes after birth. Ptdsr-deficient neonates were also growth-retarded, had a pale appearance and displayed various malformations. These included cleft palate, abnormal head shape, absence of eyes and edematous skin (Figure 1h). Thus, deletion of the Ptdsr gene resulted in perinatal lethality with variable severity and penetrance of phenotypes.

Expression of Ptdsr during embryogenesis and in adult tissues

The observed perinatal lethality indicates that Ptdsr plays an important role during development. Analysis by RT-PCR (data not shown) showed that Ptdsr is expressed early in development, because we were able to detect Ptdsr transcripts in ES cells and embryos at all developmental stages. To analyze in more detail the temporal and spatial expression patterns of Ptdsr, and to correlate expression patterns with observed pathological malformations, we made use of a Ptdsr-β-geo gene-trap reporter mouse line generated from a Ptdsr gene-trap ES cell clone. This line has an insertion of β-galactosidase in the 3' region of the gene (Figure 2a).

We first examined Ptdsr expression by X-Gal staining in heterozygous embryos staged from E9.5 to E12.5. These developmental stages were chosen so as to investigate Ptdsr expression in affected organs prior to the onset of pathological malformations in Ptdsr -/- embryos. At E9.5 we found Ptdsr expression in the developing neural tube, somites, heart, gut and branchial arches (Figure 2b). At E10.5, Ptdsr expression remained high in the developing nervous system, with most intense staining in the forebrain, hindbrain and neural tube. At this stage of embryogenesis, high levels of Ptdsr expression could also be detected in the developing limb buds and eyes (Figure 2b). Ptdsr expression was altered at E12.5, with most intensive β-galactosidase staining in the eyes, developing condensations of the limb buds, neural tube and brain (Figure 2b). Transverse sections of X-Gal-stained embryos at E12.5 showed an asymmetric expression pattern in the neural tube with intense staining of the central mantle layer but no expression in the dorsal part of the neural tube (for example, the roof plate; Figure 2c). Expression in dorsal root ganglia lateral to the neural tube and in the somites was observed; Ptdsr was expressed throughout the somite structure (myotome, dermatome and sclerotome; Figure 2d). Expression boundaries between somites were evident, with no expression in the segmental interzones, which correspond to the prospective intervertebral discs (Figure 2d). Transverse sections of the developing eye at E12.5 revealed strong Ptdsr expression in the inner layer of the neural cup, which will later develop into the neural retina. Furthermore, Ptdsr expression was detected in the primary lens fiber cells of the developing lens (Figure 2e). We carefully investigated whether Ptdsr is expressed from E10.5 to E12.5 in the developing kidney and lungs, but no expression could be detected indicating that Ptdsr expression is required only at later stages in the development of these organs (see below).

Hybridization of a multiple-tissue northern blot revealed a single transcript of about 1.8 kb in almost every tissue analyzed in adult mice (Figure 2f). The most prominent expression was observed in testis, thymus, kidney, liver and skin, with moderate to low expression in lung, small intestine, spleen, stomach and skeletal muscle. Thus, Ptdsr is ubiquitously expressed throughout embryogenesis and in adult tissues, although at different levels.

Ptdsr is required for normal tissue and organ differentiation

We next examined the role of Ptdsr in organ development. Serial histological sections of Ptdsr -/- and control embryos were taken to perform a detailed morphological analysis of all organ systems during development. A significant delay in organ and tissue differentiation was observed at E16.5 in lungs, kidneys and intestine. Lungs of control littermates were properly developed with expanding alveoli (Figure 3a). Terminal bronchi and bronchioles were already well developed, and terminally differentiated epithelial cells with cilia on the luminal cell surface were present. In contrast, almost no alveoli or bronchioles were present in Ptdsr -/-  lungs, indicating a delay or arrest in lung sacculation and expansion. Instead, we observed an abundance of mesenchyme that appeared highly immature (Figure 3g). A similar delay in tissue differentiation of Ptdsr -/- embryos was found in the kidneys (Figure 3h). Kidneys from Ptdsr+/+  embryos were well developed at E16.5, showing terminally differentiated glomeruli with Bowman's capsule and collecting tubules lined with cuboidal epithelial cells (Figure 3b). In contrast, Ptdsr-deficient kidneys had only primitive glomeruli at E16.5, and collecting tubules were less well-developed. Instead, a large amount of undifferentiated mesenchyme was present in Ptdsr -/- kidneys (Figure 3h). A delay in tissue differentiation was also found in the intestine at this stage of development. Ptdsr -/- embryos displayed improperly developed villi and an underdeveloped or absent submucosa (Figure 3i). In wild-type embryos (Figure 3c), intestinal cellular differentiation was already highly organized, with intramural ganglion cells between the external and internal muscular layers. Such neuronal cells were absent from the intestine of Ptdsr -/- embryos (Figure 3i), however.

Some Ptdsr -/- mice (4.5 %) also displayed extensive brain malformations that resulted in externally visible head abnormalities, with occasional ectopic tissue outside the skull or exencephaly (Figure 1f,h). Histological analysis revealed an extensive hyperplasia of brain tissue with herniation of brain tissue either through the skull-cap or through the ventral skull (Figure 3d,j). In the most severe cases, expansion of brain tissue in mutant mice resulted in further perturbations of cortical structures (Figure 3d,j). Of note, a similar brain phenotype was observed in the Ptdsr-deficient mouse line generated by Li and colleagues [31].

In contrast to the study of Li et al. [31], however, we found almost normally developed lungs at birth. Ptdsr -/-lungs showed, in comparison to wild-type, only a slight delay in maturation and were fully ventilated in neonates in most cases (Figure 3e,k). This demonstrates that Ptdsr-deficient mice can overcome the delay in embryonic lung differentiation and display normal lung morphology at birth. Thus, it would appear highly unlikely that Ptdsr -/- mice die from respiratory failure. Consistent with the observations of Kunisaki and colleagues [32], we found severely blocked erythropoietic differentiation at an early erythroblast stage in the liver (Figure 3f,3l), suggesting an explanation for the grossly anemic appearance that we observed in our Ptdsr -/- mice.

Loss of Ptdsr activity is associated with defects in ocular development and can lead to formation of ectopic eye structures

By gross morphology we could differentiate two classes of Ptdsr mutants: those that appeared normal with both eyes present (Figure 4) and those that were severely affected and displayed uni- or bilateral anophthalmia (Figure 5).

Analysis of normal or mildly affected embryos revealed no differences between mutant and wild-type embryos in the differentiation of the developing eye until E16.5. In both genotypes, inner and outer layers of the retina displayed a comparable differentiation status, as shown, for example, at E12.5 (Figure 4a,e). At day E16.5, however, retinal layers in Ptdsr -/- embryos were much thinner than in wild-type embryos, contained fewer cells and were greatly reduced in size (Figure 4b,f). Comparison of the retinal structures of Ptdsr +/+ and Ptdsr -/- embryos revealed that all four retinal layers were present in Ptdsr-knockout mice at E16.5 (Figure 4b,f). At E18.5 (Figure 4c,g) and in neonatal animals (postnatal day P0; Figure 4d,h), the differences in retinal differentiation between Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- mice were still evident, but the size reduction of the retinal layers was less pronounced in the knockout mice. Ptdsr-deficient animals seem to have compensated for the marked delay in cellular differentiation and expansion of retinal layers. Close examination of retinal structures revealed that the inner granular layer was still less expanded in Ptdsr-deficient animals, however, and that it contained fewer cells and was still severely underdeveloped in comparison with the corresponding retinal layer in control animals (Figure 4c,4g and 4d,4h). Thus, even mildly affected Ptdsr -/- mutants had ocular malformations with defects in differentiation of retinal structures.

We next examined Ptdsr -/- embryos that displayed unilateral or bilateral absence of eyes (Figure 5a) by serial sectioning of whole embryos. These embryos showed complex malformations of the optical cup, including absence of the lens (Figure 5b). Most surprisingly, we found pigmented epithelial cells in the nasal cavity of all Ptdsr-knockout mice with anophthalmia that were analyzed histopathologically. We could identify black-colored pigmented cells embedded in the epithelium of the maxillary sinus that resembled presumptive retinal-pigmented epithelium (Figure 5b,c). Examination of consecutive serial sections revealed the formation of a primitive eye structure, with induction and subsequent proliferation of ectopic mesenchymal tissue immediately adjacent to the displaced pigmented epithelium (Figure 5d). This structure was clearly induced ectopically, and we failed to identify similar changes in any of the wild-type embryos. In summary, we observed a wide range of ocular malformations in Ptdsr-deficient mice that ranged from differentiation defects in retinal cell layers (for example, the inner granular layer) in mildly affected homozygotes to anophthalmia in severely affected Ptdsr -/- mice that was associated with induction of ectopic eye structures in nasal cavities.

Phagocytosis and clearance of apoptotic cells is normal in Ptdsr-deficient mice

We next tested whether Ptdsr is functionally required for the clearance of apoptotic cells. We started with an investigation of cell death in vivo in the interdigital areas of the developing limbs. Apoptosis of interdigital cells in the distal mesenchyme of limb buds occurs most prominently from developmental stages E12.0 to E13.5 and can be easily examined in situ by whole-mount terminal deoxynucleotide transferase-mediated UTP end-labeling (TUNEL). We compared the pattern of interdigital cell death in fore and hind limb buds from Ptdsr -/- (n = 3) and Ptdsr +/+ (n = 3) mice at E12.5 and E13.5. No differences in accumulation of TUNEL-positive cell corpses were observed between the two genotypes (Figure 6a). The kinetics of cell death occurrence and regression of the interdigital web was similar in wild-type and mutant littermates, providing no evidence that Ptdsr-deficiency is associated with impaired clearance of apoptotic interdigital cells during limb development.

To investigate further whether removal of apoptotic cells is impaired in Ptdsr -/- mice, we stained immunohistochemically for activated caspase 3 (aCasp3) and analyzed additional organs and tissues where apoptosis plays a crucial role in tissue remodeling during development. Starting at E12.5, we analyzed and compared the number and distribution of aCasp3-positive cells in over 140 serial sections of three wild-type and six Ptdsr -/- embryos in consecutive and corresponding sections. The sagittal sections were separated by 5 μm, allowing a detailed analysis of apoptosis in several organs and tissues. Tissue restructuring by programmed cell death occurred most notably within the ventral part of the neural tube (Figure 6b,f) and in the developing paravertebral ganglia (Figure 6d,h) with many apoptotic cells being present. In these tissues Ptdsr is highly expressed at E12.5 (Figure 2c) but we observed no difference in the number or distribution of apoptotic cells in Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- embryos. The same was true for the developing kidney: apoptotic cells were present in Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- embryos, in limited numbers, but we failed to detect any differences in the number of apoptotic cells between the genotypes (Figure 6c,6g). Furthermore, when we continued our analysis of apoptotic cell clearance in vivo at E16.5, E17.5 and E18.5 of embryonic development as well as in neonatal mice, the number and distribution of apoptotic cells was similar in both genotypes. As already observed at E12.5, analysis of aCasp3-stained sections of the developing thymus, heart, diaphragm, genital ridge, eyes and retina convincingly showed that there was no impairment in apoptotic cell removal in Ptdsr -/- mice. Moreover, because Li and colleagues [31] reported impaired clearance of dead cells during lung development in Ptdsr-deficient mice, we examined the rate of apoptosis induction and cell clearance in our Ptdsr-knockout mice in the lung. Analysis of aCasp3-stained lung tissue from Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- mice at E17.5 and P0 demonstrated that apoptosis was an extremely rare event during lung morphogenesis at this stage. In addition, there were no differences in the number or distribution of apoptotic cells in Ptdsr -/- and Ptdsr +/+ mice. Furthermore, we were unable to detect any evidence of tissue necrosis in lungs from Ptdsr-deficient mice. In contrast to the report of Li et al. [31], we never observed recruitment of neutrophils or other signs of pulmonary inflammation at any stage of development in our Ptdsr-deficient mice.

To analyze whether macrophages are recruited into areas where apoptosis is prominent during embryogenesis, we stained consecutive serial sections either with the macrophage surface marker F4/80 or with aCasp3. Surprisingly, there was no co-localization of macrophages with apoptotic cells. In virtually all embryonic tissues, apoptotic cells and macrophages were localized in different compartments (Figure 6e,6i; and see also Additional data file 1, Figure S1). This suggests that at this stage of development it is mainly neighboring cells that are involved in removal of apoptotic cells, rather than professional macrophages. In summary, our analysis in vivo did not reveal any impairment in apoptotic cell clearance in Ptdsr-deficient embryos during development and further suggests that phagocytosis of apoptotic cells is mainly mediated by non-professional 'bystander' cells.

To determine whether macrophages from Ptdsr-knockout mice were impaired in the efficacy of apoptotic cell uptake in vitro, we performed phagocytosis assays with fetal-liver-derived macrophages (FLDMs) and quantified their phagocytosis rates. Phagocytosis of apoptotic thymocytes was investigated at 60, 90 and 120 minutes after addition of target cells in the absence of serum. Analysis of phagocytosis rates by flow cytometric analysis (FACS) revealed no differences in the efficacy of apoptotic cell uptake between Ptdsr -/- and Ptdsr+/+ macrophages and demonstrated no differences in apoptotic cell engulfment between selected time points (data not shown). To re-examine and further independently validate the result of normal apoptotic cell uptake by Ptdsr -/- macrophages, we performed phagocytosis assays for 60 min and determined the percentage of macrophages that had engulfed apoptotic cells, in a total of at least 300 macrophages counted by fluorescence microscopy. Phagocytosed, 5-carboxytetramethylrhodamine- (TAMRA-) labeled apoptotic cells were identified as being engulfed by inclusion in F4/80-labeled macrophages. Analysis was done independently by three investigators who were not aware of macrophage genotypes (Ptdsr -/- or Ptdsr+/+). Again, no differences were found in the percentage of macrophages that had engulfed apoptotic cells (Figure 7a,c,e) or in the relative number of phagocytosed apoptotic cells per macrophage (phagocytotic index; Figure 7f). Moreover, single Ptdsr -/-macrophages could be identified that had engulfed even more apoptotic target cells than had wild-type macrophages (Figure 7b,d). Thus, Ptdsr-deficient macrophages had a normal ability to ingest apoptotic cells and were not impaired in recognition or phagocytosis of cells that had undergone programmed cell death.

Ptdsr-deficiency results in reduced production of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines after macrophage stimulation

In addition to its suggested importance for phagocytosis of apoptotic cells, it has been proposed that Ptdsr fulfils a second crucial role in regulating and maintaining a non-inflammatory environment upon the recognition of apoptotic cells by macrophages [26]. We therefore tested whether Ptdsr -/- macrophages were able to release anti-inflammatory cytokines after ingestion of apoptotic cells. We examined levels of TGF-β1 and interleukin-10 (IL-10) after stimulation of FLDMs with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), with and without co-culture of apoptotic cells. Quantification of TGF-β1 and IL-10 levels after 22 hours of culture demonstrated that Ptdsr -/- macrophages were able to secrete these anti-inflammatory cytokines upon ingestion of apoptotic cells, although at a slightly lower level than wild-type (Figure 8a,b). This indicates that ablation of Ptdsr function does not compromise in general the ability of macrophages to release immune-suppressive cytokines after recognition and engulfment of apoptotic cells.

To analyze whether pro-inflammatory signaling is affected in Ptdsr -/- macrophages, we stimulated FLDMs from Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- mice with LPS and measured levels of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) at different time points after stimulation (Figure 8c). Ptdsr -/- macrophages produced significantly less TNF-α than did wild-type macrophages. The difference in TNF-α secretion was first visible after 3 h of LPS stimulation and became more prominent during the course of the experiment (for example, after 9 h and 12 h of LPS stimulation; Figure 8c). To analyze whether TNF-α release by Ptdsr -/- macrophages can be affected by engulfment of apoptotic cells, we stimulated FLDMs with LPS, apoptotic cells or both. Quantification of TNF-α levels by ELISA after 22 h showed that Ptdsr-deficient macrophages release less TNF-α after stimulation with LPS alone, and also after double stimulation of macrophages with LPS and apoptotic cells (Figure 8d). Moreover, the double stimulation demonstrated that the LPS-induced TNF-α release by Ptdsr -/- macrophages could be inhibited by co-administration of apoptotic cells to an extent comparable to that seen in wild-type macrophages. Similar results were obtained when other pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-6 and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, were analyzed (data not shown). These results indicate that Ptdsr is not required in macrophages for the inhibition of pro-inflammatory signaling after recognition and engulfment of apoptotic cells. Ptdsr-deficiency does, however, affect the overall release of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines after stimulation with LPS and after double treatment with LPS and apoptotic cells, indicating that Ptdsr-deficient macrophages have a reduced capacity to produce or secrete pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines.

Discussion

Ptdsr is required for the differentiation of multiple organ systems during development

In this study, we have generated a null mutation in the phosphatidylserine receptor (Ptdsr) gene in C57BL/6J mice. We show that ablation of Ptdsr results in profound differentiation defects in multiple organs and tissues during embryogenesis, although with variable penetrance. While this work was in progress, two other groups reported the generation of Ptdsr-deficient mice [31,32]. In all three knockout mouse lines, the first two exons ([31] and this study) or exons one to three [32] were deleted by replacement with a neomycin-selection cassette. The Ptdsr-knockout mouse lines differ in the genetic background in which the mutation was generated and maintained, however. In our case, the Ptdsr-null allele was generated in an isogenic C57BL/6J background, whereas Li et al. [31] and Kunisaki et al. [32] investigated the phenotype of their Ptdsr-knockout mice in a mixed 129 × C57BL/6 background. The ablation of Ptdsr function results in perinatal lethality in all cases, but there are interesting differences in severity or expressivities of phenotypes among the different Ptdsr-deficient mouse lines. This might be due either to differences in genetic background or because the phenotypes that have been investigated in this study have not been analyzed in such detail before.

In the Ptdsr-knockout mouse line reported here, growth retardation started from E12.5 onwards and was associated with delayed differentiation in several organs in which Ptdsr is expressed either during embryogenesis or later in adulthood. At E16.5 almost no branching morphogenesis of the lung epithelium was observed in Ptdsr -/- lungs. Similarly, epithelial structures were only partially developed in mutant kidneys, without terminal differentiation of Bowman's capsule and with a severe reduction in the number of differentiated collecting tubules. Likewise, the differentiation of the intestine was also severely delayed at this developmental stage. When compared with wild-type controls, intestinal tissues of Ptdsr knockout mice appeared unstructured, with an absence of enteric ganglia and of differentiated smooth muscle tissue. Interestingly, defects in kidney and intestine differentiation were not described in the Ptdsr-knockouts generated by Li et al. [31] and Kunisaki et al. [32]. Surprisingly, when we examined Ptdsr-/- embryos shortly before birth (E18.5) or neonatally, we found only mild differentiation delays in organs that appeared severely affected at mid-gestation. This 'recovery' was most visible in Ptdsr -/- lungs: at P0 we found expanded lungs in the knockout mice that showed normal branching patterns, with differentiated alveoli and bronchioles.

We investigated the occurrence of programmed cell death during lung development in wild-type and Ptdsr-knockout mice throughout embryogenesis (E16.5 to P0). Comparative immunohistochemistry for aCasp3 revealed that apoptosis is a rare event during lung morphogenesis. Furthermore, we failed to detect any differences in the number of apoptotic cells in Ptdsr-knockout and wild-type animals in the rare cases where we could detect apoptotic cells within lung tissues. These findings are contrary to the results reported by Li et al. [31], who suggested that impaired clearance of apoptotic mesenchymal and epithelial cells causes a failure in lung morphogenesis in Ptdsr-deficient mice. In contrast, our findings are in line with the current view on lung development during embryogenesis. Accordingly, formation of the epithelial lung via branching morphogenesis can be subdivided into a series of sequential steps that involve: first, formation of the organ anlage in the form of a placode; second, primary bud formation by placode invagination; third, branch initiation and branch outgrowth; fourth, further reiteration of the branching process; and fifth, terminal differentiation of organ-specific proximal and distal structures [34,35]. In contrast to other invagination processes during embryogenesis, such as mammary gland formation, the lumen of the lungs is expanded by successive branching events, branch outgrowth and elongation, rather than by apoptosis [34,36]. Finally, because the lungs of Ptdsr -/-neonates were almost fully expanded and appeared normal in structure in comparison to wild-type littermates, it is highly unlikely that Ptdsr mutants die of respiratory lung failure. In addition, Li and colleagues [31] demonstrated that surfactant expression is normal in Ptdsr-deficient animals, supporting the idea of normal maturation of surfactant-producing type II alveolar epithelial cells and lung function. Other defects must therefore be responsible for the death of Ptdsr-mutant mice. The frequently observed subcutaneous edema of various extents in Ptdsr-deficient homozygotes gave us a hint that Ptdsr-deficiency and lethality might be associated with cardiovascular problems. Indeed, very recently we have obtained strong evidence that Ptdsr-knockout mice die as a result of defects in heart development that are associated with specific cardiopulmonary malformations; (J.E. Schneider, J.B., S.D. Bamfort, A.D.G., C. Broadbent, K. Clarke, S. Neubauer, A.L. and S. Battacharya, unpublished observations).

In addition, we demonstrate that eye development requires a functional Ptdsr gene. Ptdsr-deficient embryos can be roughly divided into two categories. The first, severely affected group develops anophthalmia that correlates with formation of ectopic retinal-pigmented epithelium and induction of proliferation of underlying mesenchyme in the nasal cavity. This phenotype represents a completely novel lesion that to our knowledge has not been described before in any other mouse mutant. The second group shows normal external eye structures, although in this case retinal development is temporally delayed during mid-gestation, with persistent, abnormal morphogenesis of the inner granular retinal layer at later stages of embryogenesis. A possible explanation for these two phenotypes can be found in the expression pattern of the Ptdsr gene. Initially, Ptdsr is expressed throughout the whole developing nervous system, with exceptionally high levels in the anterior part of the forebrain. Later expression becomes more restricted to the developing retina and lens. Thus, Ptdsr might play an important role in early events of ocular morphogenesis, such as establishment and bisection of eye fields and formation of optic cups. These early eye-formation steps are closely interconnected with development of the forebrain [37,38] and the nose [39-41].

Interestingly, we occasionally observed serious malformations of forebrain and nasal structures in Ptdsr-knockout embryos that were associated with bilateral anophthalmia (see for example the mutant embryo in Figure 1g). This suggests that Ptdsr is involved in the regulation of differentiation processes within forebrain regions, and that ablation of Ptdsr function might secondarily affect early eye formation. Li et al. [31] found smaller lenses in Ptdsr-knockout mice and described the formation of retinal protrusions, although anophthalmia and specific differentiation defects of retinal cell layers were not reported in their study. Li et al. proposed [31] that the eye phenotype they observed could be explained by failed removal of apoptotic cells during eye development, but we think that the observed defects are unrelated to a failure of apoptotic cell clearance. A recent comprehensive kinetic analysis of apoptosis induction during mouse retinal development described four major peaks of apoptotic cell death [42]. This study demonstrated that there is an initial phase of cell death during the invagination of the optic cup (E10.5), followed by subsequent waves of apoptosis induction immediately before and after birth (E18.5 to postnatal day P2), and from postnatal days P9 to P10 and P14 to P16 [42]. Thus, besides the formation of the inner and outer layers of the optic cup in early eye development, other major phases of retinal cell apoptosis take place only postnatally and correspond to important periods in the establishment of neuronal connections. Furthermore, cell death during normal retinal development occurs in retinal layers distinct from the inner granular layer where we observed the most pronounced differentiation defects in the Ptdsr -/- mutants described here. Other studies that connect the postnatal elimination of apoptotic photoreceptor cells to Ptdsr-mediated macrophage engulfment [43] should be interpreted with extreme caution as these studies were based on the monoclonal anti-Ptdsr antibody mAb 217G8E9 [26,43] (see below).

Consistent with the results of Li et al. [31], we found particular brain malformations in our Ptdsr -/- mice. Exencephaly and hyperplastic brain phenotypes were observed at a low penetrance in Ptdsr-mutant mice (less then 4.5% of homozygotes), but these do not resemble to any extent the brain-overgrowth phenotypes of caspase- or Apaf1-knockout mice ([44], and references therein) in that we failed to identify any differences in the number or distribution of apoptotic cells or pyknotic cell clusters in the neuroepithelium of Ptdsr -/- and Ptdsr+/+ mice. Thus, reduced cell death or diminished clearance of apoptotic neural progenitor cells is unlikely to be the cause of the brain hyperplasia.

In summary, our studies demonstrate that Ptdsr is required for normal tissue differentiation, especially during the mid-gestation period when we observed the most severe differentiation delays in several organs of Ptdsr-knockout mice. The multiple defects in tissue differentiation cannot be explained by failure of apoptotic cell clearance, as this process is normal in our Ptdsr-knockout line. This result therefore indicates that Ptdsr has a novel, hitherto unexpected, role in promoting tissue maturation and terminal differentiation. Additional studies with conditionally targeted Ptdsr-deficient mice are required to investigate the role of spatial and temporal Ptdsr expression and function during tissue differentiation.

Ptdsr is not essential for the clearance of apoptotic cells

Our studies demonstrate that Ptdsr is not a primary receptor for the uptake of apoptotic cells. Investigation of apoptotic cell clearance in vivo in Ptdsr -/- embryos conclusively showed that removal of apoptotic cells is not compromised by ablation of Ptdsr function. Comparative analysis of ten different tissues and organs in Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- animals at several stages of embryonic development and in neonates failed to identify impaired uptake of apoptotic cells at any time during development. Furthermore, phagocytosis assays in vitro demonstrated a completely normal uptake of apoptotic cells by Ptdsr -/- macrophages, with some knockout macrophages showing loads even higher than wild-type of engulfed dead cells. These results are contrary to the expected role of Ptdsr in apoptotic cell clearance and to the reported findings of Li et al. [31] and Kunisaki et al. [32], as well as to a study done with a phosphatidylserine receptor null allele in C. elegans [45]. In previous studies in the mouse, the distribution and amount of apoptotic cells in Ptdsr-knockout and control animals were investigated in only a few tissues and at one [31] or two [32] developmental stages. Li et al. [31] examined lung, midbrain and retina at day E17.5 of gestation and identified apoptotic cells by TUNEL staining. Their findings must be interpreted with caution because remodeling of cellular structures by apoptosis in specific retina layers is known to occur mainly postnatally [42], and apoptosis plays an important physiological role in the maintenance and homeostasis of lung epithelium after birth or in pathological conditions involving pulmonary inflammation and not during lung development [46]. This postnatal role for apoptosis is in accordance with our data, as we rarely observed apoptotic cells in retina or lung tissue throughout embryogenesis in Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- mice. Kunisaki et al. [32] analyzed TUNEL-stained sections of liver and thymus at days E13.5 and E16.5 of development in Ptdsr+/- and Ptdsr -/- embryos and found reduced rather than increased numbers of TUNEL-positive cells in Ptdsr-deficient embryos. Using co-localization of TUNEL-positive cells with F4/80-positive macrophages they suggested that Ptdsr -/- embryos exhibited a three-fold increase in the frequency of unphagocytosed TUNEL-positive cells together with a severely reduced number of F4/80-positive cells. These results must be interpreted very carefully, however, as it is technically difficult to unambiguously identify engulfed target cells in individual macrophages in solid tissues by fluorescence microscopy.

In addition, our data suggest that during embryogenesis, macrophage-mediated clearance of apoptotic cells is not the only - or even the primary - mechanism for the removal of apoptotic cells. In many tissues where programmed cell death occurs as a prominent event during embryogenesis, such as remodeling of the genital ridge during gonad morphogenesis and differentiation of the neural tube, we found almost no co-localization of apoptotic cells and macrophages. This indicates that in these cases clearance of apoptotic cells is directly mediated by neighboring 'bystander' cells rather than by macrophages that have been recruited into areas where apoptosis occurs. Obviously these in vivo clearance mechanisms are not compromised by Ptdsr-deficiency in our knockout mutant. This finding is in line with studies in macrophageless Sfpi1-knockout embryos that are deficient for the hematopoietic-lineage-specific transcription factor PU.1. Here, the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells during embryogenesis is taken over by 'stand-in' mesenchymal neighbors [47]. As recognition of phosphatidylserine is thought to be a universal engulfment mechanism for all cells that are able to phagocytose apoptotic cells, it is very striking that apoptotic cell clearance mediated by non-professional bystander cells is also not compromised by Ptdsr-deficiency.

In contrast to Li et al. [31], we did not observe any impairment in the uptake of apoptotic cells by Ptdsr -/- macrophages in vitro. We performed phagocytosis assays in vitro with fetal-liver-derived macrophages, while in their assays, Li and colleagues used thioglycollate-elicited peritoneal macrophages after adoptive transfer of Ptdsr -/- hematopoietic stem cells. The different results obtained in the two studies are puzzling; they might be due to the use of different macrophage or cell populations. We and Kunisaki et al. [32] found that Ptdsr-deficiency is to some extent associated with defects in hematopoiesis. Thus, it seems possible that recruitment and activation/differentiation of macrophages after adoptive transfer and thioglycollate elicitation are affected by Ptdsr-deficiency. We do not think that the different results observed in Ptdsr-knockout mice in a mixed C57BL/6 × 129 background and in a pure C57BL/6J background can be attributed to genetic background effects: comparison of apoptotic cell engulfment efficacies of thioglycollate-elicited macrophages from 129P2/OlaHsd and C57BL/6J mice did not show any differences in apoptotic cell uptake (J.B. and A.L., unpublished observations). Moreover, in contrast to our studies, neither Li et al. [31] nor Kunisaki et al. [32] determined phagocytotic engulfment indexes for Ptdsr-deficient macrophages.

Interestingly, we observed differences between Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- macrophages in the secretion of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines after stimulation with LPS and apoptotic cells. This provides evidence that cellular activation and effector mechanisms are impaired in Ptdsr-deleted macrophages. It remains to be determined which classical pathways of macrophage activation and function involve Ptdsr. This is especially important in light of recent findings that demonstrated nuclear localization of the Ptdsr protein [29].

Most strikingly, the recently published data regarding the genetic ablation or perturbation of phosphatidylserine receptor function in C. elegans are also contradictory. Wang et al. [45] reported that psr-1, the C. elegans homolog of Ptdsr, is important for cell-corpse engulfment, whereas psr-1 RNAi studies performed by Arur et al. [25] yielded, in this respect, no phenotype. Moreover, Wang and colleagues hypothesized on the basis of their data that psr-1 might act to transduce an engulfment signal upstream of Ced-2 (Crk II), Ced-5 (Dock 180), Ced-10 (Rac 1) and Ced-12 (Elmo) in one of the two cell-corpse engulfment pathways in the worm [45]. But the loss-of-function phenotype of psr-1 mutants and the complementation phenotypes in overexpressing transgenic worms shown by Wang et al. [45] are rather weak as compared to the classical C. elegans engulfment mutants [8].

Many previous functional studies that reported a requirement for Ptdsr for the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells used the monoclonal anti-Ptdsr antibody mAb 217G8E9 [26]. This antibody was used in Ptdsr binding and blocking experiments, as well as in subcellular localization studies, which led to the conclusion that Ptdsr is a transmembrane receptor critical for signal transduction at the engulfment interface. More recently it was used in binding assays to show that the human and worm Ptdsr molecules can recognize phosphatidylserine [45]. In the course of the study presented here, we stained immunohistochemically for Ptdsr with mAb 217G8E9 on wild-type and Ptdsr-deficient macrophages and fibroblasts (see Additional data file 1, Figure S2 and data not shown). To our surprise, we observed similar staining patterns with cells of both genotypes. Furthermore, using a Ptdsr-peptide array we found that mAb 217G8E9 can bind weakly to a Ptdsr peptide, explaining the original isolation of Ptdsr cDNA clones by phage display [26]; but the antibody mainly recognizes additional, as-yet unknown, membrane-associated protein(s) (see Additional data file 1, Figure S2). Experiments that have used this antibody should therefore be interpreted with great caution as they might come to be viewed in a different light.

Conclusion

Our results demonstrate that Ptdsr is essential for the differentiation and maturation of multiple tissues during embryogenesis. Ablation of Ptdsr function results in neonatal lethality and severe defects in the morphogenesis of several organs. The developmental malformations cannot be explained by impaired clearance of apoptotic cells, a process that proved to be normal in Ptdsr-deficient mice. This opens up the possibility either that there is an as-yet unknown Ptdsr receptor, which might act as a primary phosphatidylserine recognition receptor, or that recognition of phosphatidylserine and subsequent apoptotic cell engulfment and anti-inflammatory signaling are mainly mediated through phosphatidylserine bridging proteins and their cognate receptors. Although Ptdsr -/- macrophages were not impaired in their ability to phagocytose apoptotic cells, they showed reduced cytokine responses after stimulation. Further work will be required to determine the molecular mechanisms of these newly recognized Ptdsr functions during development.

Materials and methods

Construction of the targeting vector and generation of Ptdsr-knockout and gene-trap mice

Targeting vector

A Ptdsr-containing bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clone (GenBank accession number AC091694; RP-23-316F3) was isolated by sequence homology from a C57BL/6J genomic BAC library (RP-23; BACPAC Resources, Oakland, USA). A 14.5 kb KpnI/BamHI fragment containing the entire Ptdsr locus and 5' and 3' flanking regions was subcloned from this BAC clone and a 1.9 kb RsrII/AatII fragment containing exons I and II of the Ptdsr gene was replaced by a 1.2 kb loxP-flanked neomycin-resistance gene cassette (neo).

Homologous recombination in ES cells and generation of germ-line chimeras

Bruce4 ES cells were transfected with KpnI-linearized targeting vector and selected with G418. ES-cell clones resistant to G418 were isolated and analyzed by Southern blot analysis for homologous recombination events within the Ptdsr locus. Chimeric mice were produced by microinjection of two independent homologous recombinant (Ptdsr+/-) ES cells into BALB/c blastocysts and transfer to pseudopregnant foster mothers followed by development to term. Chimeric males were mated with C57BL/6J females. From the two selected ES-cell clones, one successfully contributed to the germ-line. Germ-line transmission of the mutant allele was verified by PCR and Southern blot of genomic DNA from black coat-color F1 offspring.

Ptdsr gene-trap and generation of germ-line chimeras

An ES-cell line carrying a β-geo gene-trap vector in the Ptdsr locus was identified by searching the BayGenomics database (BayGenomics, San Francisco, USA; [48]) with the full-length Ptdsr cDNA. A single ES-cell line was identified carrying the gene-trap in intron V, between exons V and VI of the Ptdsr gene. Chimeric mice were generated by microinjection into CB20 blastocysts and transfer to pseudopregnant foster mothers. Chimeric males were mated with 129P2/OlaHsd females. Germ-line transmission of the mutant gene-trap allele was verified by expression analysis using β-galactosidase staining and RT-PCR.

Genotype analysis

The genotypes of embryos or animals were determined by PCR analysis and confirmed by Southern blot. Genomic DNA for PCR was prepared from extraembryonic membranes or tail clips using a non-organic tail-DNA extraction protocol [49]. High molecular weight genomic DNA for Southern blotting was prepared according to standard protocols. For PCR analysis the wild-type Ptdsr allele was detected using forward primer 1 (5'-GACACTGTCCATGGCAAACAC-3') and reverse primer 2 (5'-TAAAGTCGCCTTCCAGAAGATT-3'). The primer 1 site is located 5' to the deletion and the primer 2 site within the deletion. This primer pair amplified a fragment of approximately 300 bp from wild-type and Ptdsr+/- mice but not from Ptdsr -/-mutants. To detect the mutant Ptdsr allele, genomic DNA was also amplified using primer 1 and reverse primer 3 (5'-CCACACGCGTCACCTTAATA-3'), which corresponds to a sequence in the neo cassette. In this case, a 500 bp fragment was detected in mice heterozygous or homozygous for the mutant allele, while no signal was detected in wild-type mice. For Southern blot analysis, genomic DNA (30 μg) was digested overnight with BamHI (30 U; Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) and ScaI (30 U; Roche), fractionated on a 0.8 % agarose gel, transferred to a nylon membrane (Hybond N; Amersham Biosciences Europe GmbH, Freiburg, Germany) and hybridized with 5' and 3' flanking probes. The BamHI digest was hybridized with a Ptdsr-specific 5' flanking probe, and Southern blot gave a single 17.2 kb band for wild-type (+/+), an 11.6 kb band for homozygous (-/-) and both bands for heterozygous (+/-) mice. The ScaI digest was hybridized using a 3' flanking probe, and Southern blot gave a single 12.4 kb band for wild-type, a 17.2 kb band for homozygous and both bands for heterozygous mice.

Northern blot analysis

Total RNA was isolated from homogenized embryos using TRIZOL reagent (Invitrogen GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany). For northern blots, either total RNA (30 μg) was extracted from embryos, electrophoresed and transferred to a nylon membrane (Hybond N; Amersham) or a polyA+ RNA northern blot (OriGene Technologies Inc., Rockville, USA) was hybridized using as the probe a Ptdsr fragment amplified from wild-type cDNA using forward primer 5'-GTTCCAGCTCGTCAGACTCG-3' and reverse primer 5'-TGCCCCTAAGACATGACCAC-3'. In all experiments the same membrane was re-hybridized with a β-actin probe (OriGene) to confirm that equivalent RNA levels were present in each lane. Northern blotting indicated that homozygous mutant embryos did not express Ptdsr mRNA and heterozygous mutant embryos expressed only reduced amounts of Ptdsr mRNA.

Western blot analysis

Embryos (E13.5) for protein isolation were homogenized in lysis buffer containing 1 × PBS, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (CompleteMini; Roche). Equal amounts (25 μg) of protein lysate were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred onto a PVDF membrane (Millipore, Billerica, USA) according to standard protocols. Western blots were done using a specific antibody to Ptdsr (PSR N-20, sc-11632; Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Santa Cruz, USA) and β-actin (ab-6276; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) as described by the supplier. Secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase were from Santa Cruz and Abcam, used as described by the supplier, and detection was performed with an enhanced chemiluminescence system (ECLPlus; Amersham).

Animal experiments

Wild-type C57BL/6J and 129P2/OlaHsd mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, USA) and Harlan UK (Bicester, UK), respectively. All mice were housed in individually ventilated cages in a specific pathogen-free environment with a 12 h light-dark cycle and were fed a regular unrestricted diet. The GBF's routine surveillance program screened for selected pathogens. The Ptdsrtm1Gbf mutant was crossed to C57BL/6J mice to establish the co-isogenic C57BL/6J-Ptdsrtm1Gbf mouse line. All studies were approved by the appropriate authorities.

Isolation of embryos

Heterozygous male and female mice were intercrossed in order to obtain Ptdsr-deficient progeny. Females were daily monitored for vaginal plugs, and noon of the day of plug detection was defined as E0.5. Embryos at indicated time points were dissected in sterile PBS, washed in ice-cold PBS and transferred to cold fixative. Extra-embryonic membranes were kept and used for genotyping. Ptdsr -/- embryos and their wild-type littermates were used for experiments.

Histology, TUNEL staining and immunohistochemistry

Embryos for histology and immunohistochemistry were harvested and fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin, dehydrated through a graded series of alcohol, embedded in paraffin, sagittally sectioned at 5 μm intervals, and every fifth section was processed for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining according to standard protocols. Remaining sections of wild-type and Ptdsr -/- specimens were used for immunohistochemistry. For detection of apoptotic cells and macrophages, anti-aCasp3 (an antibody specific for activated caspase 3; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, USA) and anti-F4/80 (Serotec GmBH, Düsseldorf, Germany; #MCA 1957) antibodies were used as described by the supplier. Detection was performed using indirect streptavidin with biotinylated secondary antibodies and cobalt-enhanced diaminobenzidine (brown) or fast-red (red) as chromogens. Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. For whole-mount terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated UTP end labeling (TUNEL), limb buds were dissected from E12.5 and E13.5 embryos, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and processed for analysis as previously described [50].

Preparation of fetal liver-derived macrophages (FLDMs)

Fetal livers were excised from embryos at E12.5 and E13.5, respectively, washed in PBS and dissociated enzymatically for 60 min at 37°C. The digestion buffer (150 μl per liver) comprised 0.6 U/ml dispase I (Roche), 0.1% collagenase D (Roche), 10 U DNase (Roche), and 20% FCS in PBS. X-Vivo 15 medium (Cambrex, East Rutherford, USA) was added to the resulting cell suspension, and after centrifugation (200 × g; 3 min) cells were resuspended in X-Vivo 15 medium supplemented with 50 ng/ml macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and cultured on non-treated tissue-culture dishes at 37°C with 5% CO2. Every second or third day the medium was changed by centrifugation. Following withdrawal of M-CSF on day 6 after excision, adherent cells were cultured for an additional 24-48 h in X-Vivo 15 medium.

Macrophage phagocytosis assays

For preparation of monolayer cultures of macrophages, FLDMs were plated on glass coverslips in 24 well plates (2 × 105 cells per well) in X-Vivo 15 medium. For preparation of apoptotic target cells, primary thymocytes were harvested from the thymus of 4- to 8-week-old C57BL/6J mice, stained with TAMRA for 15 min, and apoptosis was induced either by treating cells with 5 μM staurosporine in medium for 4 h at 37°C or by culturing cells in medium overnight. The efficacy of apoptosis induction was compared in thymic target cells and controls by FACS analysis. On average, 60% of the cells of the resulting population were apoptotic, with exposed PS on their surface, and less than 5% of the cells were necrotic, as confirmed by FITC-annexin V and propidium iodide staining. The apoptotic thymocytes obtained were washed with PBS and added to the prepared FLDM cultures (ratio 10:1). Phagocytosis was then allowed to proceed at 37°C and 5% CO2. After the indicated time periods, the uptake of apoptotic cells by FLDMs was stopped by intensive washing of co-cultures with cold PBS to remove unphagocytosed cells. To measure phagocytosis of apoptotic thymocytes, macrophages were further processed for immunofluorescence analysis. Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, blocked in 0.5% BSA/PBS and stained with an anti-F4/80 antibody (Serotec) followed by a secondary antibody coupled to Alexa 488 (Molecular Probes Inc., Eugene, USA). Coverslips were mounted on slides and engulfed thymocytes were enumerated by fluorescence microscopy. The percentage of phagocytosis was calculated by counting at least 300 macrophages and determining the number of macrophages that had engulfed apoptotic thymocytes. The phagocytotic index was calculated according to the following formula: phagocytotic index = (total number of engulfed cells/total number of counted macrophages) × (number of macrophages containing engulfed cells/total number of counted macrophages) × 100. The experiments were performed at least three times, each time in triplicate, and the counting was done by three different investigators.

Measurement of macrophage cytokine production

Monolayer cultures of FLDMs and apoptotic thymocytes were prepared as described above. FLDMs were incubated with medium, LPS (10 ng/ml), apoptotic cells (ratio 1:10) or both for the determination of IL-10, TGF-β1 or TNF-α levels after co-culture for 22 h. For TNF-α quantification at various time points, FLDMs were cultured with a high concentration of LPS (100 ng/ml). Culture supernatants were harvested and TNF-α (Mouse TNF-α OptEIA set; BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany) and TGF-β1 (Quantikine, TGF-β1 immunoassay; R&D Systems) were measured by ELISA as described by the supplier. IL-10 in culture supernatants was determined by a cytometric bead assay (Mouse inflammation CBA; BD Biosciences) as indicated in the manual. Data are presented as mean ± SEM from at least three independent experiments, each carried out in triplicate. Analysis of the results used the Wilcoxon-signed rank test; p values below 0.05 were considered significant.

Additional data files

Additional data file 1 contains: Figure S1 showing the localization of apoptotic cells and macrophages in the subcutis of developing embryos; and Figure S2 showing immunohistochemical staining of the Ptdsr protein in macrophages derived from wild-type and Ptdsr-knockout mice.

Supplementary Material

Additional data file 1

Figure S1 showing the localization of apoptotic cells and macrophages in the subcutis of developing embryos; and Figure S2 showing immunohistochemical staining of the Ptdsr protein in macrophages derived from wild-type and Ptdsr-knockout mice

Click here for additional data file

Acknowledgements

We thank Rudi Balling (GBF Research Center) and Shoumo Bhattacharya (University of Oxford) for many helpful and stimulating discussions. We thank Evi Wollscheid-Lengeling (GBF) for help with harvest of neonatal mice, Ronald Frank (GBF) for providing Ptdsr peptide arrays, Maria Ebel (GBF) for ES cell blastocyst injections, Manfred Rohde (GBF) for electron microscopy, Kurt Dittmar (GBF) for help with confocal microscopy and Bastian Pasche (GBF) for critical reading of the manuscript. We thank BayGenomics, a genomic consortium funded by the US National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, for providing the ES cell gene-trap line RRJ099. This work was supported in part by the EU project EUMORPHIA, "Understanding human molecular physiology and pathology through integrated functional genomics in the mouse model" (QLG2-CT-2002-00930).

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Targeted inactivation of the phosphatidylserine receptor gene. (a) Ptdsr gene-targeting strategy. Homologous recombination in ES cells results in the deletion of exons I and II of the murine Ptdsr gene through replacement of a loxP-flanked neomycin phosphotransferase gene (neo), thereby ablating the reading frame of the encoded protein. Coding exons I-VI are shown as filled boxes, and deleted exons are colored green. Restriction sites are: A, AatII; B, BamHI; EI, EcoRI; EV, EcoRV; K, KpnI; R, RsrII; S, SacII; Sc, ScaI, X, XhoI. The probe sites are red boxes labeled: C, 5' outside probe; D, 3' outside probe. (b) Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA extracted from wild-type (+/+) and Ptdsr+/- (+/-) animals, digested with BamHI and hybridized with the 5' outside probe to confirm germ-line transmission of the mutant Ptdsr allele. 'Wild-type' indicates the BamHI fragment of 17.2 kb from the wild-type Ptdsr allele; 'mutant' indicates the BamHI fragment of 11.6 kb from the targeted Ptdsr allele. (c) PCR genotyping of embryos and animals from intercrosses of heterozygous Ptdsr+/- using a wild-type and a mutant allele-specific primer combination, respectively. (d) Northern blot analysis of total RNA isolated from E13.5 wild-type, Ptdsr+/- and Ptdsr -/- embryos. (e) Western blot analysis of protein from homogenates of E13.5 wild-type, Ptdsr+/- and Ptdsr -/- embryos using a Ptdsr-specific antibody. Developmental abnormalities at (f,g) E15.5 and (h) birth; in this and all subsequent figures wild-type littermates are located on the left and homozygous mutant mice on the right. The Ptdsr -/-  embryos show exencephaly (f) or prosencephalic hernia in the forebrain region (arrowhead, neonate 2; h), uni-or bilateral absence of the eyes (f,g and neonate 2 in h, and arrow, neonate 3 in h), an abnormal head shape with proboscis (g), edema (arrowheads in f and g), and general anemia (asterisk, neonate 3 in h).

Figure 2

Expression analysis of Ptdsr during embryonic development. (a) Schematic representation of the construction of the Ptdsr gene-trap mouse line used for expression analysis at different embryonic stages. Gray and bright blue boxes represent regulatory elements of the gene-trap, and β-geo, the β-galactosidase/neomycin phosphotransferase fusion protein-expression cassette [48,51]. Restriction enzyme nomenclature is as in Figure 1 (b) Whole-mount β-galactosidase staining of heterozygous Ptdsr gene-trap embryos at mid-gestation. Expression of Ptdsr is highest in neural tissues and somites, in the branchial arches, the developing limbs, the heart, the primitive gut and the developing eye. (c-e) Sectioning of E12.5 β-galactosidase-stained embryos confirms expression of Ptdsr in (c) the neural tube; (inset in c) neural epithelium; (d) somites; and (e) eyes. Expression in the eye is restricted to developing neural retinal and lens cells. (f) Expression analysis of adult tissues by northern blot. Expression of Ptdsr in the muscle (asterisk) was detected only on long-term exposures of the filter (> 48 h). A β-actin hybridization was used to confirm equal loading of RNA samples. Scale bar, 100 μm.

Figure 3

Histological analysis of wild-type and Ptdsr -/-organs during embryogenesis. (a-f) Wild-type embryos and (g-l) Ptdsr -/- littermates were isolated at various embryonic stages, serially sectioned sagittally and analyzed for developmental abnormalities in detail after H&E staining. At E16.5, the lungs of (g) Ptdsr -/- embryos had sacculation just starting, and well-formed alveoli (asterisks) or epithelium-lined bronchioles (arrows) were scarce compared to (a) wild-type lungs. At E16.5, the glomeruli (arrows) in the kidney of (h) Ptdsr -/- embryos were underdeveloped compared to (b) wild-type, collecting tubules (arrowheads) were missing and undifferentiated blastemas (asterisks) were more abundant. The jejunum had no intramural ganglia in Ptdsr -/-embryos (i; and arrows in c); and a well-developed submucosa (asterisk in c) was missing. Brain sections at E18.5 show that (j) Ptdsr -/-embryos may have herniation (arrow) of the hypothalamus through the ventral skull (secondary palate), most likely through Rathke's pouch, and a severe malformation of the cortex (asterisks) compared to (d) wild-type embryos. At E18.5, (e) wild-type and (k) Ptdsr -/- lungs showed normal sacculation and formation of alveoli (asterisks) and bronchioles (arrow). (f) Wild-type neonatal liver had significant numbers of megakaryocytes (arrows), compared to (l) homozygous mutant littermates, and higher numbers of erythropoietic islands and of mature erythrocytes. Hepatocellular vacuoles are due to glycogen stores (asterisks) that were not metabolized in perinatally dying Ptdsr -/- animals, in contrast to wild-type newborns. Scale bar, 100 μm, except for (d) and (j), 1 mm.

Figure 4

Morphology of wild-type and Ptdsr -/- retinas. Serial sagittal sections of (a-d) wild-type and (e-h) Ptdsr -/- retina were analyzed for developmental abnormalities at (a,e) E12.5, (b,f) E16.5, (c,g) E18.5, and (d,h) P0. Normal patterning of the retina was observed in Ptdsr -/-embryos, with an outer granular layer (OGL), outer plexiform layer (OPL), inner granular layer (IGL) and inner plexiform layer (IPL). Note that the IGL in Ptdsr -/- retinas is less thick than that in wild-type littermates in comparing (c,g) and (d,h). Morphometric analysis (numbered lines) of wild-type and Ptdsr -/- retinas confirmed the initial finding of a thinner retina in Ptdsr -/- animals than in wild-type (all values in μm). Scale bar, 50 μm.

Figure 5

Histological analysis of eye development in severely affected eyeless Ptdsr -/- embryos. (a) In anophthalmic Ptdsr -/- embryos, unilateral or bilateral absence of the eyes could be detected. (b-d) Serial H&E-stained sagittal sections of homozygous mutant embryos at (b) E17.5 and (c,d) E18.5 show complex malformation of the optic cup and lack of any lens structure. Careful examination of adjacent sections (b-d) reveals an ectopic misplacement of retinal-pigmented epithelium in the maxillary sinus. Not only is the deposition of pigment clearly visible (higher magnification insets) but also the induction of proliferation of underlying tissues and the change in morphology of the maxillary sinus (d). Scale bar, 100 μm in (b-d).

Figure 6

Analysis of programmed cell death and involvement of macrophages in the removal of apoptotic cells in wild-type and Ptdsr -/-embryos. (a) Whole-mount TUNEL staining (blue) of limb buds from wild-type and Ptdsr -/- embryos at E13.5 show no differences in the amount or localization of apoptotic cells during the beginning regression of the interdigital web. Serial sagittal sections stained for activated caspase 3 (aCasp3; red) in (b-d) wild-type and (f-h) Ptdsr -/- embryos at E12.5 show apoptotic cells in the neural tube (b,f), the mesonephros (c,g) and the developing paravertebral ganglia (d,h). Tissue distribution and total number of apoptotic cells was indistinguishable between genotypes and was confirmed by the comparison of consecutive sections of wild-type and Ptdsr -/-embryos from different developmental stages. Analysis of macrophage numbers and location by F4/80 staining (brown) of consecutive sections in paravertebral ganglia of (e) wild-type and (i) homozygous mutant embryos revealed that macrophages (arrows) are not located close to apoptotic cells during embryonic development. (For comparison, see also Additional data file 1, Figure S1, with the online version of this article). Scale bar, 100 μm.

Figure 7

Phagocytosis of apoptotic cells by fetal liver-derived macrophages (FLDMs). FLDMs from (a,b) wild-type and (c,d) Ptdsr -/- embryos were cultured for 60 min with TAMRA-stained (red) apoptotic thymocytes (treated with staurosporine) from C57BL/6J mice and then stained with F4/80 (green). Macrophages of both genotypes have phagocytosed apoptotic cells (arrowheads). (e) Quantification of phagocytosis of apoptotic cells by wild-type or Ptdsr -/-macrophages revealed no differences in the percentage of macrophages that had engulfed apoptotic cells, whether or not apoptosis had been induced by staurosporine. Microscopic analysis (b,d) and quantification of the number of apoptotic cells phagocytosed by single macrophages and (f) calculation of the average number of cells phagocytosed per macrophage failed to reveal differences in the efficacy of removal of apoptotic cells between wild-type and Ptdsr -/-  FLDMs.

Figure 8

Cytokine production by FLDMs upon stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and apoptotic cells. FLDMs from wild-type and Ptdsr -/- embryos were incubated (a,b,d) with medium (0), LPS (10 ng/ml), apoptotic cells (ratio 1:10) or in combination with LPS and apoptotic cells or (c) with LPS (100 ng/ml) alone. Culture supernatants were harvested after 22 h (a,b,d) or at the indicated time points (c). TNF-α and TGF-β1 were quantified by ELISA and IL-10 by cytometric bead array (CBA) assay. Data are presented as mean ± SEM from at least three independent experiments, each carried out in triplicate. *, significant difference between genotypes, p < 0.05; **, significant difference between genotypes, p < 0.01; Wilcoxon-signed rank test.

Table 1

Penetrance of phenotypes in Ptdsr -/- mice from E9.5 to E18.5, as detected by gross morphology

Subsets of the major categories of malformation are indicated by indentation.BMP Receptor Signaling Is Required for Postnatal Maintenance of Articular Cartilage

Abstract

Articular cartilage plays an essential role in health and mobility, but is frequently damaged or lost in millions of people that develop arthritis. The molecular mechanisms that create and maintain this thin layer of cartilage that covers the surface of bones in joint regions are poorly understood, in part because tools to manipulate gene expression specifically in this tissue have not been available. Here we use regulatory information from the mouse Gdf5 gene (a bone morphogenetic protein [BMP] family member) to develop new mouse lines that can be used to either activate or inactivate genes specifically in developing joints. Expression of Cre recombinase from Gdf5 bacterial artificial chromosome clones leads to specific activation or inactivation of floxed target genes in developing joints, including early joint interzones, adult articular cartilage, and the joint capsule. We have used this system to test the role of BMP receptor signaling in joint development. Mice with null mutations in Bmpr1a are known to die early in embryogenesis with multiple defects. However, combining a floxed Bmpr1a allele with the Gdf5-Cre driver bypasses this embryonic lethality, and leads to birth and postnatal development of mice missing the Bmpr1a gene in articular regions. Most joints in the body form normally in the absence of Bmpr1a receptor function. However, articular cartilage within the joints gradually wears away in receptor-deficient mice after birth in a process resembling human osteoarthritis. Gdf5-Cre mice provide a general system that can be used to test the role of genes in articular regions. BMP receptor signaling is required not only for early development and creation of multiple tissues, but also for ongoing maintenance of articular cartilage after birth. Genetic variation in the strength of BMP receptor signaling may be an important risk factor in human osteoarthritis, and treatments that mimic or augment BMP receptor signaling should be investigated as a possible therapeutic strategy for maintaining the health of joint linings.

Introduction

Thin layers of articular cartilage line the bones of synovial joints and provide a smooth, wear-resistant structure that reduces friction and absorbs impact forces (Brandt et al. 1998). Loss or damage to articular cartilage is a hallmark of arthritic diseases and is one of the most common reasons that both young and old adults seek medical care. Millions of people are afflicted with arthritis, and it ultimately affects more than half of people over the age of 65 (Badley 1995; Yelin and Callahan 1995). A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms that create and maintain articular cartilage is crucial for discovering the causes of joint disorders and providing useful medical treatments.

Joint formation begins during embryogenesis, when stripes of high cell density called interzones form across developing skeletal precursors (Haines 1947). Programmed cell death occurs within the interzone, and a three-layered interzone forms that has two layers of higher cell density flanking a region of lower cell density. Non-joint precursors of the skeleton typically develop into cartilage, which hypertrophies and is replaced by bone. However, cells within the high-density layers of the interzone are excluded from this process and develop into the permanent layers of articular cartilage found in the mature joint (Mitrovic 1978).

Studies over the last 10 y have begun to elucidate some of the signaling pathways that contribute to the early stages of joint formation. Wnt14 is expressed in stripes at the sites where joints will form, and it is capable of inducing expression of other joint markers when misexpressed at new locations in the limb (Hartmann and Tabin 2001). Several members of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) family of secreted signaling molecules are also expressed in stripes at sites where joints will form, including those encoded by the genes Gdf5, Gdf6, Gdf7, Bmp2, and Bmp4 (Storm and Kingsley 1996; Wolfman et al. 1997; Francis-West et al. 1999; Settle et al. 2003). Of these, Gdf5 expression is most strikingly limited to regions where joints will develop and is one of the earliest known markers of joint formation. Mutations in either Gdf5 or the closely related Gdf6 gene also block formation of joints at specific locations, providing strong evidence that these molecules are essential for the joint formation process (Storm et al. 1994; Settle et al. 2003). However, mutations in Bmp2 or Bmp4 cause early embryonic lethality, making it difficult to test their role in joint formation (Winnier et al. 1995; Zhang and Bradley 1996).

Much less is known about how signaling pathways function during the subsequent maturation and maintenance of adult joint structures. Importantly, BMP signaling components are present in adult articular cartilage, suggesting that they may function during the late development or maintenance of this critical structure (Erlacher et al. 1998; Chubinskaya et al. 2000; Muehleman et al. 2002; Bau et al. 2002; Bobacz et al. 2003).

BMPs bind tetrameric complexes of two type I and two type II transmembrane serine-threonine kinase receptors. Upon BMP binding, these complexes transduce a signal by phosphorylating members of the Smad family of transcription factors (Massague 1996). Recent experiments have implicated two different BMP type I receptors in skeletal patterning, BMPR1A and BMPR1B. Both receptors can bind BMP2, BMP4, and GDF5, although GDF5 shows higher affinity for BMPR1B (Koenig et al. 1994; ten Dijke et al. 1994; Yamaji et al. 1994; Nishitoh et al. 1996; Chalaux et al. 1998). Both receptors are also expressed in dynamic patterns during normal development. In limbs, Bmpr1a expression becomes restricted to joint interzones, perichondrium, periarticular cartilage, hypertrophic chondrocytes, and interdigital limb mesenchyme. In comparison, Bmpr1b expression is seen primarily in condensing precartilaginous mesenchymal cells, regions flanking joint interzones, perichondrium, and periarticular cartilage (Dewulf et al. 1995; Mishina et al. 1995; Zou et al. 1997; Baur et al. 2000). Null mutations in the Bmpr1b gene produce viable mice with defects in bone and joint formation that closely resemble those seen in mice missing Gdf5 (Storm and Kingsley 1996; Baur et al. 2000; Yi et al. 2000). Null mutations in Bmpr1a cause early embryonic lethality, with defects in gastrulation similar to those seen in mice with mutations in Bmp4 (Mishina et al. 1995; Winnier et al. 1995). Recent studies with floxed alleles suggest that Bmpr1a is also required for many later developmental events, but its roles in bone and joint formation have not yet been tested (Mishina 2003).

A genetic system for activating or inactivating genes specifically in joint tissues would be particularly useful for further studies of joint formation and maintenance. Here we take advantage of the tissue-specific expression pattern of the Gdf5 gene to engineer a Cre/loxP system (Nagy 2000), Gdf5-Cre, that can be used to remove or ectopically express genes in joints. Tests with reporter mice show that this system is capable of modifying genes in all of the structures of the mature synovial joint, including the ligaments of the joint capsule, the synovial membrane, and the articular cartilage. Gdf5-Cre recombination bypasses the early embryonic lethality of null mutations in Bmpr1a, and shows that this receptor is required for early joint formation at some locations and for initiation of programmed cell death in webbing between digits. Interestingly, Bmpr1a is also required for postnatal maintenance of articular cartilage throughout most of the skeleton. In Gdf5-Cre/Bmpr1afloxP mice, articular cartilage initially forms normally, but subsequently loses expression of several key cartilage markers after birth. It ultimately fibrillates and degenerates, resulting in severe osteoarthritis and loss of mobility. These experiments suggest that BMP signaling is required for normal maintenance of postnatal articular cartilage, and that modulation of the BMP signaling pathway may play an important role in joint disease.

Results

Genetic System for Testing the Function of Genes in Joint Development

To generate a general system capable of specifically testing genes for functions in skeletal joint development, we engineered transgenic mice to express Cre recombinase in developing joints (Figure 1). Gdf5 is a gene strongly expressed in stripes across developing skeletal elements during embryonic joint formation. A bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) containing the Gdf5 locus was modified by homologous recombination in bacteria to insert a cassette encoding Cre-internal ribosome entry site (IRES)-human placental alkaline phosphatase (hPLAP) into the translation start site of Gdf5 (Figure 1A). This modified BAC was then used to make lines of transgenic mice. The resulting Gdf5-Cre transgenic mice were tested for transgene expression and Cre recombinase activity by crossing them to R26R reporter mice that activate the expression of lacZ after Cre-mediated removal of transcriptional stop sequences (Soriano 1999). The resulting progeny were analyzed both for expression of the transgene by assaying HPLAP activity and for recombination of DNA by assaying LACZ activity. The progeny from all three lines showed strong LACZ expression primarily in joints, and in two of three lines HPLAP expression could also be seen in joint regions. Interestingly, HPLAP expression in the Gdf5-Cre transgenic GAC(A) line used for all subsequent breeding experiments was seen to precede LACZ expression during successive development of joints in the digits (Figure 1C) (unpublished data). These experiments clearly demonstrate that the Gdf5-Cre transgene expresses Cre recombinase and causes DNA recombination in developing joint regions.

GAC(A) mice were crossed with lacZ ROSA26 Cre reporter strain (R26R) mice to analyze the pattern of Cre-mediated lacZ recombination throughout development. Joints in developing limbs begin forming in a proximal-distal pattern such that the shoulder joint forms prior to the elbow joint. In addition, three major stages of early joint development have been defined by histology as (1) interzone formation, (2) three-layer interzone formation, and (3) cavitation (Mitrovic 1978). Consistent with the proximal-distal pattern of joint development in the limbs, LACZ activity is seen at embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5) in the more proximal joints, including the shoulder and knee (unpublished data). By E14.5, LACZ expression is typically seen in all but the most distal joints of the limbs (Figure 1B and 1C), but with some variability in both strength and extent of expression from embryo to embryo. The strongest-staining embryos often have additional staining in fingertips (not seen in the E14.5 embryo in Figure 1C, but clearly detectable in the E13.5 embryo shown in Figure 2). Sections through developing joints show that LACZ is present in many cells at the interzone stage (unpublished data). However, expression of LACZ in nearly 100% of joint cells is not achieved until the three-layer interzone stage (for example, in the knee joint at E14.5 or in any of the phalangeal joints at E16.5 (unpublished data). Within the developing skeleton, Cre-mediated expression of LACZ remains strikingly specific to joints throughout development. Furthermore, it is seen in all the structures of postnatal synovial joints including the articular cartilage, joint capsule, and synovial membrane (Figure 1D and 1E) (unpublished data). These patterns are consistent with the well-established expression of Gdf5 in interzone regions during embryonic development (Storm and Kingsley 1996). Adult expression patterns of the Gdf5 gene are not as well characterized, but Gdf5 expression has previously been detected in adult articular cartilage using both RT-PCR and immunocytochemistry (Chang et al. 1994; Erlacher et al. 1998; Bobacz et al. 2002).

Other sites besides limb joints also have Cre-mediated lacZ expression. Starting at E13.5, LACZ activity is detected in an anterior and posterior domain of the limb bud (Figure 2C). At E14.5, LACZ activity is detectable in the developing ear pinnae, ribs, sternum, tissues in the face, and some regions of the brain and spinal cord (Figure 1B) (unpublished data). At birth, LACZ is also expressed in tendons running along the vertebral column, regions of tendons in the wrist and ankle, and some tendon insertions (Figure 1D) (unpublished data). By 5 wk of age, LACZ is also expressed in the hair follicles, ear cartilage, some cells in the growth plate of the long bones, and portions of the brain and spinal cord (unpublished data). Surprisingly, 23 of 63, or 37% of transgenic mice analyzed also show some degree of wider “ectopic” LACZ expression, which can extend throughout many different tissues in the animal. However, sustained expression of the transgene itself, as assayed by HPLAP activity, is still restricted primarily to joints in animals that show evidence of more generalized recombination based on LACZ expression (unpublished data). This suggests that in a fraction of animals, sporadic expression of Cre at some time early in development is sufficient to lead to both ectopic recombination and LACZ expression. While the fraction of animals with broader recombination patterns must be tracked and accounted for during experiments, these animals offer the potential benefit of revealing additional new functions of target genes that could be subsequently studied with additional site-specific Cre drivers.

Gdf5-Cre/Bmpr1afloxP Animals Survive to Adulthood with Ear, Webbing, and Joint Defects

We next used the Gdf5-Cre system to test the role of BMP signaling during normal joint development. Gdf5-Cre transgenic mice were bred to animals carrying a conditional floxed allele of the Bmpr1a locus (Mishina et al. 2002), usually in the presence of the R26R reporter allele to facilitate simultaneous visualization of Cre-mediated recombination patterns (see typical cross in Figure 3). PCR amplification confirmed that a key exon of the Bmpr1a gene was deleted in mice that also carried the Gdf5-Cre transgene (unpublished data). Previous studies have shown that the recombined Bmpr1afloxP allele mimics a null allele of the Bmpr1a locus when transmitted through the germline (Mishina et al. 2002). The Gdf5-Cre/Bmpr1afloxP conditional knockout mice were viable and survived to adulthood, showing that the Gdf5-Cre driver can bypass the early embryonic lethality previously reported in animals with a null mutation in the Bmpr1a locus (Mishina et al. 1995).

The viable Gdf5-Cre/Bmpr1afloxP mice showed several phenotypes. First, the conditional knockout mice had shorter ears that often lay flatter against their heads than controls (controls 13.1 ± 0.1 mm long, n = 38; mutants 11.8 ± 0.2 mm, n = 11; p < 0.0001). BMP signaling is known to be required for growth of the external ear of mice (Kingsley et al. 1992), and this phenotype likely reflects loss of Bmpr1a function in the fraction of ear cells that express the Gdf5-Cre transgene. Most mutant mice also showed soft tissue syndactyly or retention of webbing between the first and second digits of their feet, a phenotype that was more frequent and more severe in the forelimbs (201 of 220, or 91%, of forefeet and 109 of 220, or 50%, of hindfeet). Finally, mutant animals showed obvious skeletal changes in whole-mount skeletal preparations. At some sites in the ankles, joints seemed to be missing entirely, with fusion of bones that would normally be separate. For example, the second distal tarsal was fused to the central tarsal bone in every conditional knockout animal examined (18 of 18), a phenotype not observed in controls (zero of 18) (Figure 3B and 3C). At other locations, joints had clearly formed but showed dramatic loss of staining with the cartilage matrix marker Alcian blue (Figure 3B–3E) (unpublished data). Normal Alcian blue staining was seen in non-articular regions, such as the cartilaginous growth plate (Figure 3D and 3E, asterisk). These data suggest that Bmpr1a function is required for the formation of specific joints in the ankle region and for either generation or maintenance of articular cartilage in most other joints of the limb.

Developmental Origin of Webbing Phenotype

Interdigital mesenchyme is normally eliminated by apoptosis during embryonic development, a process that can be stimulated by BMP beads, inhibited by Noggin, or blocked by overexpression of dominant-negative BMP receptors (Garcia-Martinez et al. 1993; Yokouchi et al. 1996; Zou and Niswander 1996; Guha et al. 2002). Limbs of Gdf5-Cre/Bmpr1afloxP mutant embryos showed obvious retention of interdigital webbing between the first and second, but not other, digits of E14.5 forelimbs (Figure 2A and 2B), a pattern that corresponds to the presence or absence of webbing seen in the adult limb. They also showed excess tissue on the posterior margin of the fifth digit (Figure 2B, arrow). Analysis of LACZ expression in Gdf5-Cre/R26R reporter embryos showed that Cre-mediated recombination has occurred by E13.5 in the metacarpal-phalangeal joints, and in the interdigital region between the first and second, but not other, digits. In addition, a domain of recombination and expression of LACZ is also reproducibly seen in the posterior half of the fifth digit (Figure 2C). Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling (TUNEL) staining of interdigital mesenchyme between the first and second digits (Figure 2D and 2E) and the fifth digit flanking mesenchyme showed a decreased number of dying cells in the regions where excess tissue is retained in the mutant limbs. Numbers of phosphorylated histone H3-labeled proliferating cells were also elevated in these regions (Figure 2F). Most cells found in the webbed region between the first and second digits at E15.5 strongly expressed LACZ in Gdf5-Cre/Bmpr1afloxP mutant embryos (Figure 2H). These data suggest that regional loss of BMPR1A receptor signaling blocks programmed cell death in interdigital mesenchyme, and that the recombined cells survive and proliferate in the absence of BMPR1A signaling.

Failure of Early Joint Formation in Ankle Regions

The Bmpr1a gene is expressed in the interzone region of developing joints at E13.5 (Baur et al. 2000). In situ hybridization showed that the gene is also expressed in the interzones of ankle joints and prospective articular cartilage regions of digit joints at E15.5 (Figure 4). LACZ staining indicated that Cre-mediated recombination begins to occur in ankle joints around E14.5, and is extensive by E15.5 (Figure 4G and 4J) (unpublished data). In the ankle joint regions that were obviously fused in postnatal mutant animals, alterations in early joint marker expression could also be seen by E15.5. At this stage, the Gdf5 gene is normally expressed in stripes that mark the sites of joint formation (Figure 4F), and the gene for the major collagen protein of cartilage matrix (Col2a1) is down-regulated in the interzone region (Figure 4E). In contrast, Col2a1 staining extended completely through the joint region between the second and central tarsal of Gdf5-Cre/Bmpr1afloxP mutants (Figure 4H, black arrow), and Gdf5 expression was seen only as a small notch extending into where the joint should be forming (Figure 4I, bracket). These data suggest that the fusions seen between ankle bones in postnatal mutant skeletons are the result of incomplete segmentation of skeletal precursors during embryonic development, a defect confined to some locations in the ankle.

Failure to Maintain Articular Cartilage in Other Joints

In most joints of Bmpr1a conditional knockout mice, embryonic segmentation of skeletal precursors occurred normally. Although Gdf5-Cre-mediated recombination was seen as early as E13.5 in digit interzone regions (see Figure 2C), no changes in cell death or cell proliferation could be seen in the metacarpal-phalangeal or metatarsal-phalangeal joints at E13.5 or E14.5 (unpublished data). Similarly, although clear LACZ expression was seen by E15.5 in interphalangeal joints and periarticular regions (Figure 4D), no difference in morphology or expression of Col2a1, Gdf5, or Bmpr1b was seen in the articular regions of the phalanges at these stages (unpublished data).

At birth, digit joints were generally indistinguishable from those in control animals; chondrocytes were abundant in articular regions and were surrounded by typical cartilage matrix with normal staining by Safranin O, a histological stain for proteoglycans (Figure 5). At this stage, both wild-type and mutant cells in articular regions also expressed high levels of Col2a1 and Aggrecan (Agg), the genes encoding the major structural proteins of cartilage matrix (Figure 5B and 5G) (unpublished data). No alterations in cellular apoptosis or proliferation were observed (unpublished data).

To determine whether articular cells were properly specified in mutants, we also analyzed expression of Matrilin-4 (Mat4), a gene expressed specifically in the periarticular and perichondral regions of developing joints (Klatt et al. 2001). In both control and mutant animals, transcription of Mat4 was clearly detectable in the articular cartilage layers of newborn joints (Figure 5D and 5I). In all experiments, expression of LACZ throughout articular regions indicated that Cre-mediated recombination had occurred throughout the articular regions (Figure 5C, 5H, 5E, and 5J). The normal histological appearance, staining properties, and marker gene expression patterns suggest that Bmpr1a is not required for the initial formation or specification of articular cartilage.

By 1 wk after birth, obvious differences began to be detected in the articular regions of mutant animals. The expression of Col2a1 was reduced throughout the articular surfaces of the carpals, metacarpals, and phalanges of the forefeet (unpublished data). Less severe reductions were also seen in articular cells of tarsals and metatarsals in the hindfeet (unpublished data). By 2 wk of age, Col2a1 expression was reduced in most cells of the articular region (Figure 5L and 5Q), accompanied by markedly reduced Safranin O staining (Figure 5K and 5P), and decreased expression of Agg and two genes normally expressed in more mature articular cartilage cells, Collagen 3 (Col3a1) and Collagen 10 (Col10a1) (Figure 5M and 5R) (unpublished data) (Eyre 2002). Inhibition of BMP signaling in cultured chondrocytes has previously been reported to induce Collagen 1 (Col1a1) expression, increase proliferation, and result in cells with flattened, fibroblast-like morphology (Enomoto-Iwamoto et al. 1998). However, we saw no increase in the expression of Col1a1 in mutant articular cartilage, and no proliferation was detected in articular cells of either mutant or control animals (unpublished data). While recombined LACZ marker expression was detected in most articular cartilage cells, it was also observed in scattered subarticular chondrocytes, growth plate chondrocytes, and osteoblasts (Figure 5O and 5T) (unpublished data). Although this implies that BMP signaling was defective in multiple cell types, the observed defects were confined to the articular cartilage. For example, Osteocalcin and Col1a1 expression appeared normal in osteoblasts (unpublished data). Together, these data suggest that BMPR1A activity is required in postnatal joint articular cartilage to maintain expression of many genes encoding structural components of cartilage matrix.

Previous studies have shown that Sox9 is required for normal cartilage differentiation, for expression of cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM) genes including Agg, and is a direct transcriptional regulator of the key cartilage matrix gene Col2a1 (Bell et al. 1997; Lefebvre et al. 1997; Bi et al. 1999; Sekiya et al. 2000). Notably, despite reduced expression of many cartilage matrix marker genes in Bmpr1a mutant mice, the SOX9 protein was present at normal levels in articular regions at all stages examined, including newborn, 2-wk-old, 7-wk-old, and 9-mo-old mice (Figure 5N and 5S) (unpublished data).

Synovial Hypertrophy, Cartilage Erosion, and Accelerated Cartilage Maturation

Conditional loss of Bmpr1a led to marked hypertrophy of the synovial membrane in the joint capsule of some joints, particularly in the ankle region. In the most severely affected joints, the expanded synovial membrane grew into the joint space and was associated with obvious loss or erosion of the articular cartilage (Figure 6A and 6B, asterisks, arrows). Accelerated cartilage maturation and increased expression of Col10a1 was frequently seen in the chondrocytes underlying the articular erosions (Figure 6C and 6D, brackets) (unpublished data). Interestingly, the regions of increased Col10a1 expression did not correspond to the regions that had undergone Cre-mediated recombination. Instead, increased expression of Col10a1 was seen in a zone of largely LACZ-negative cells stretching from the cartilage adjacent to the ossification front (where Col10a1 is normally expressed in maturing cartilage cells), toward the regions where surface articular cartilage was severely eroded or missing (Figure 6A and 6B, arrowheads). Previous studies suggest that parathyroid hormone-related protein, a diffusible signal made in the articular surface, may normally inhibit maturation of underlying cartilage (Vortkamp et al. 1996; Weir et al. 1996). Local loss of the articular surface could remove this inhibition and lead to a cell-nonautonomous acceleration of maturation in chondrocytes underlying points of articular erosion.

This synovial hypertrophy is associated with increased numbers of mononuclear cells resembling synoviocytes or macrophages, cell types that are difficult to distinguish even with surface markers at early postnatal stages. However, no neutrophils were observed, suggesting that there is little inflammation. At later stages synovial hypertrophy is reduced. Further work will be needed to determine whether synovial development is regulated by BMP signaling, or whether the synovium becomes enlarged as a response to nearby skeletal malformations (such as fusion of the second and central tarsals or defects in the articular cartilage).

Noninflammatory Degeneration of Articular Cartilage in Digit and Knee Joints

Outside of the ankle region, little or no evidence was seen for expansion of the synovial membrane. Instead, mutant mice showed histological signs of osteoarthritis, such as fibrillation of the articular surface (Figure 7). As previously seen in 1- and 2-wk-old animals, Safranin O staining and Agg and Col10 expression were all reduced in mutant articular regions of the forefeet and hindfeet by 7 wk of age, and the beginning signs of cartilage loss were observed (unpublished data). By 9 mo of age, many regions of articular cartilage were completely missing or extremely fibrillated, leaving regions of exposed bone on the surface (Figure 7A–7D). No alterations were seen in the expression of Osteocalcin, Col1a1, or matrix metalloprotease-13 at either 7 wk or 9 mo.

The major weight-bearing joint of the hindlimb, the knee, showed changes that closely paralleled that seen in the foot joints. All markers of cartilage matrix looked similar to controls at E16.5, suggesting that early stages of joint formation were not disrupted (unpublished data). By postnatal day 7, Safranin O staining and Col2a1 and Agg expression were clearly reduced in the mutant, despite continued expression of Sox9 (unpublished data). The overall shape of mutant knee skeletal elements appeared similar to controls, although the fibrocartilaginous meniscus that resides between the femur and tibia appeared much less dense in mutants at E16.5. Some cartilage formed in the meniscus region, but the size of these elements was greatly reduced and contained abundant cells with fibrous, noncartilaginous appearance (unpublished data). This reduction of the meniscus can also be seen in sections from 7-wk- and 9-mo-old animals (Figure 7E, 7H, 7K, and 7N, arrows).

At 7 wk of age the normally domed tibial epiphysis was flattened and depressed in the knees of mutant animals, markedly reducing the distance between the growth plate and articular surface (Figure 7E and 7H, vertical bar). Articular cartilage was also thinner than in control animals, showed nearly complete absence of Safranin O staining, and was either acellular or beginning to fibrillate in many regions (Figure 7F and 7I). The few large Safranin O-stained cells still apparent in mutant articular regions appeared to correspond in position to rare LACZ-negative cells in adjacent sections, suggesting that Bmpr1a is required cell-autonomously in articular cartilage (Figure 7I and 7J, white arrowheads). By 9 mo, large areas of mutant knees were devoid of articular cells, and the bones of the femur and tibia appeared to rub directly against each other. Furthermore, the epiphysis of the tibia was extremely depressed, to the point that growth plate cartilage was almost exposed through the surface of the bone (Figure 7K, 7L, 7N, and 7O). In addition, mutants at 7 wk and 9 mo showed subchondral sclerosis, especially in the epiphysis of the femur (Figure 7E, 7H, 7K, and 7N, asterisks). While subchondral sclerosis is commonly seen in cases of osteoarthritis, it is unclear in this case whether the sclerosis is mainly a response of bone formation to compensate for decreased articular cartilage, or whether it is the effect of loss of Bmpr1a signaling in some LACZ-positive cells that are also observed in these regions (unpublished data).

The histological signs of joint arthritis were accompanied by functional impairments in both grasping ability and range of motion in mutant animals. Gdf5-Cre/Bmpr1afloxP mutant animals showed a highly significantly reduced ability to grasp and remain suspended on a slender rod (mean suspension time: controls 38 ± 6 s, n = 39; mutants 6 ± 3 s, n = 11; p < 0.0001). Mutant mice also showed a clear decrease in the maximum range of mobility of two different joints in the digits, as assayed by passive manipulation (MT/P1 joint: controls 100 ± 0°, n = 26; mutants 82 ± 3°, n = 8; p < 0.0003; P1/P2 joint: controls 152 ± 1°, n = 23; mutants 140 ± 5°, n = 6; p < 0.05). The structural, histological, marker gene expression, and functional changes in mutant mice demonstrate that BMPR1A is required for normal postnatal maintenance of articular cartilage.

Discussion

Previous studies suggest that BMP signaling is involved in a large number of developmental events. Many of these events occur early in embryogenesis, and complete inactivation of BMP receptors causes death by E9.5 (Mishina et al. 1995). The Gdf5-Cre recombination system bypasses the early embryonic lethality of Bmpr1a mutations, and provides important new information about the role of this receptor in limb and skeletal development.

The three major limb phenotypes revealed by eliminating Bmpr1a with Gdf5-driven Cre include webbing between digits, lack of joint formation at specific locations in the ankle, and failure to maintain articular cartilage after birth, resulting in severe arthritis. Previous studies have shown that manipulation of BMP signaling alters interdigital apoptosis during development of the limb, but no experiment has identified a specific member of the BMP signaling pathway that is required for this process (Yokouchi et al. 1996; Zou and Niswander 1996; Zou et al. 1997; Guha et al. 2002). Our new loss-of-function data confirm that BMP signaling is required for interdigital apoptosis and suggests that Bmpr1a is a critical component for mediating this signal.

At some sites, loss of Bmpr1a function leads to a defect in the early stages of joint formation, resulting in a complete failure to form a joint and fusion of bones in the ankle. Mutations in two different ligands in the BMP family, Gdf5 and Gdf6, the Bmpr1b receptor, and in the human Noggin locus (Storm and Kingsley 1996; Gong et al. 1999; Baur et al. 2000; Yi et al. 2000; Settle et al. 2003) also produce defects in joint formation at specific locations in the limbs. The joint defects associated with multiple components of the BMP pathway provide strong evidence that BMP signaling is required for early stages of joint formation at some anatomical locations.

Most joints still form normally when Bmpr1a is knocked out in Gdf5 expression domains. The lack of joint fusions outside the ankle region could be due to differences in requirement for BMP signaling in different joints, to compensating expression of other BMP receptors outside the ankles, or to differences in the detailed timing of Gdf5-Cre stimulated gene inactivation in ankles and other joint regions. Comparison of the expression of the HPLAP marker (driven directly by Gdf5 control elements) and the R26R LACZ marker (expressed following Gdf5-Cre recombination) suggests that recombination-stimulated changes in gene expression may be delayed for a 0.5–1 d in the digit region (see Figure 1C). In addition, levels of Bmpr1a mRNA and protein may persist for some time following Gdf5-Cre stimulated recombination, making it possible to bypass an early requirement for Bmpr1a in joint formation at some locations.

Following the decay of Bmpr1a mRNA and protein, the Gdf5-Cre strategy should result in permanent inactivation of Bmpr1a function in recombined cells. This system thus provides one of the first strong genetic tests of Bmpr1a function at later stages of joint development. Despite the normal appearance of articular regions and gene expression immediately after birth, Bmpr1a-deficient animals are unable to maintain the normal differentiated state of articular cartilage as they continue to develop and age. These results suggest that BMP receptor signaling is essential for continued health and integrity of articular cartilage in the postnatal period.

Articular cartilage is a key component of synovial joints and is one of the few regions in the skeleton where cartilage is maintained into adulthood. Despite the importance of articular cartilage in joint health and mobility, little is known about the factors that create and maintain it in thin layers at the ends of long bones. In our experiments, articular cartilage lacking Bmpr1a retains some normal characteristics, in that it maintains a very low proliferation rate, does not express Col1a1, and continues to express SOX9, a major transcription factor regulating expression of structural components of cartilage matrix. However, several of the most prominent structural components of cartilage matrix fail to be maintained in mutant animals, resulting in decreased synthesis of Col2a1, Agg, and proteoglycans. Therefore, BMPR1A appears to maintain articular cartilage primarily through inducing expression of key ECM components.

It is interesting that the SOX9 transcription factor continues to be expressed in mutant cartilage despite loss of Col2a1, a direct target of this transcription factor (Bell et al. 1997; Lefebvre et al. 1997). Previous studies suggest that SOX9 activity can be modified by protein kinase A (PKA)-dependent protein phosphorylation, or by coexpression of two related proteins, L-SOX5 and SOX6 (Lefebvre et al. 1998; Huang et al. 2000). In addition, close examination of the order of genes induced during chicken digit formation reveals that Sox9 turns on first, followed by Bmpr1b with L-Sox5, and then Sox6 and the cartilage matrix structural components Col2a1 and Agg (Chimal-Monroy et al. 2003). These results, together with the altered pattern of gene expression seen in our Bmpr1a-deficient mice, suggest that BMPR1A signaling may normally act to stimulate SOX9 by post-translational protein modification, or to induce L-Sox5 or Sox6 in cartilage to maintain expression of ECM components. These models are consistent with the ability of BMP2 to both increase PKA activity and induce expression of Sox6 in tissue culture cells (Lee and Chuong 1997; Fernandez-Lloris et al. 2003). Although we have tried to monitor the expression of L-Sox5 or Sox6 in postnatal articular cartilage, and test the phosphorylation state of SOX9 using previously described reagents (Lefebvre et al. 1998; Huang et al. 2000), we have been unable to obtain specific signal at the late postnatal stages required (unpublished data). Furthermore, null mutations in L-Sox5 or Sox-6 cause lethality at or soon after birth, and no effect on cartilage maintenance has been reported (Smits et al. 2001). However, it seems likely that these or other processes regulated by BMP signaling cooperate with SOX9 to induce target genes in articular cartilage.

Mutation of Smad3 or expression of dominant negative transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) type II receptor also disrupts normal articular cartilage maintenance (Serra et al. 1997; Yang et al. 2001). Both manipulations should disrupt TGFβ rather than BMP signaling, and both manipulations cause articular cartilage to hypertrophy and be replaced by bone. In contrast, our analysis of Bmpr1a mutant articular cartilage showed a loss of ECM components, but no signs of hypertrophy or bone replacement. Therefore, TGFβ and BMP signaling are playing distinct but necessary roles to maintain articular cartilage.

Although BMPs were originally isolated on the basis of their ability to induce ectopic bone formation, their presence in articular cartilage and strong effect on cartilage formation has stimulated interest in using them to repair or regenerate cartilage defects in adult animals (Chang et al. 1994; Erlacher et al. 1998; Edwards and Francis-West 2001; Chubinskaya and Kuettner 2003). The failure to maintain articular cartilage in the absence of normal BMPR1A function suggests that ligands or small molecule agonists that interact specifically with this receptor subtype may be particularly good candidates for designing new approaches to maintain or heal articular cartilage at postnatal stages.

Lack of Bmpr1a function in articular cartilage results in severe fibrillation of the articular surface and loss of joint mobility. The development of severe arthritis symptoms in Bmpr1a-deficient mice raises the possibility that defects in BMP signaling also contribute to human joint disease. Osteoarthritis is known to have a significant genetic component, but it likely involves multiple genetic factors that have been difficult to identify (Spector et al. 1996; Felson et al. 1998; Hirsch et al. 1998). Humans that are heterozygous for loss-of-function mutations in BMPR1A are known to be at risk for juvenile polyposis (Howe et al. 2001; Zhou et al. 2001), but the risk of osteoarthritis for these people has not been reported. However, the control mice used in this study were heterozygous for a null allele of Bmpr1a, and they showed little sign of osteoarthritis even late in life. Several chromosome regions have been previously linked to arthritis phenotypes in humans using either association studies in populations or linkage studies in families. It is interesting to note that several of these chromosome regions contain genes encoding different members of the BMP signaling pathway, including the BMP5 gene on human chromosome 6p12 (Loughlin et al. 2002), the MADH1 gene on human chromosome 4q26–4q31 (Leppavuori et al. 1999; Kent et al. 2002), and the BMPR2 receptor on human chromosome 2q33 (Wright et al. 1996). The complex nature of human osteoarthritis suggests that interactions between multiple genes may be involved in modifying susceptibility to the disease. The inclusion of genetic markers near BMP signaling components may help identify additional osteoarthritis susceptibility loci and facilitate the search for causative mutations.

Development and disease processes in synovial joints have been difficult to study genetically, because synovial joints are generated and function at relatively late stages of vertebrate development. The Gdf5-Cre system provides a new method for restricting gene expression or inactivation primarily to articular regions, thus avoiding the pleiotropic functions of many genes in other tissues. Depending on the configuration of the floxed target gene, this system can be used to either activate the expression of a gene primarily in developing joints (ssee Figure 1B–1D), or to inactivate gene function in articular regions (see Figure 3). Additional studies with this system should greatly enhance our knowledge of the development, function, and disease mechanisms of joints, and may bring us closer to better prevention and treatment of joint diseases.

Materials and Methods



Generation of Gdf5-Cre transgenic mice

A mouse 129x1/SvJ BAC library (Invitrogen) was screened to identify a 140-kb BAC from the Gdf5 locus. This BAC was modified using a homologous recombination system in E. coli (Yang et al. 1997) to place nuclear-localized Cre recombinase (from plasmid pML78, gift of Gail Martin) followed by IRES-hPLAP (from plasmid 1726, gift of Oliver Bogler) directly behind the ATG start site of Gdf5. In the process, 583 bp of the first exon of Gdf5 was removed and no functional GDF5 protein is predicted to be produced. The 5′ homology arm was subcloned from a PCR product tailed with XhoI and Bsp120I restriction sites that contains 781 bp of 5′ genomic Gdf5 sequence ending at the ATG translation start site (forward primer 5′-CTGTCTCGAGATGAGGTGGAGGTGAAGACCCC-3′; reverse 5′-GTTTGGGCCCATCCTCTGGCCAGCCGCTG-3′). Cre was subcloned from a 1.1-kb Bsp120I/EcoRI fragment of pML78. IRES hPLAP was subcloned from a 2.1-kb PCR product tailed with EcoRI and SpeI sites that contains the hPLAP translation stop site (forward primer 5′-ATCTCTCGAGGAATTCTCCACCATATTGCCGTCTTTTG-3′; reverse 5′-AGAACTCGAGACTAGTCGGGACACTCAGGGAGTAGTGG-3′). The 3′ homology arm was subcloned from a 0.8-kb PCR product amplified from a 0.9-kb XhoI Gdf5 genomic subclone containing part of the first exon and downstream intron. The forward primer contains the 3′ end of the first exon and is tailed with a SpeI site; the reverse primer is from the T7 promoter of the vector containing the 0.9-kb subclone and flanks the intronic XhoI site (forward primer 5′-CTAAACTAGTCACCAGCTTTATTGACAAAGG-3′; reverse 5′-GATTTCTAGAGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGC-3′). The targeting construct was built and verified in pBSSK (Stratagene, La Jolla, California, United States), then digested with XhoI and subcloned into pSV1, the vector used for homologous recombination (Yang et al. 1997). Southern blotting, PCR, and DNA sequence analysis confirmed the appropriate targeting construct and BAC modifications were made (unpublished data).

Before the modified BAC was injected to produce transgenic animals, a loxP site present in the BAC vector, pBeloBAC11, was removed to prevent the addition of undesired Cre target sites into the genome. To do this, BAC DNA was prepared by CsCl separation, digested with NotI to free the insert from the vector, and size-fractionated over a sucrose gradient. Aliquots of fractions were run on a pulse-field gel and Southern blotted using vector-specific DNA as a probe. Fractions containing unsheared insert and almost no detectable vector DNA were dialyzed in microinjection buffer (10 mM Tris [pH 7.4] with 0.15 mM EDTA [pH 8.0]) using Centriprep-30 concentrators (Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts, United States). This purified insert DNA was adjusted to 1 ng/μl and injected into the pronucleus of fertilized eggs from FVB/N mice by the Stanford Transgenic Facility. Transgenic founder mice were identified by PCR using Cre-specific primers 5′-GCCTGCATTACCGGTCGATGCAACGA-3′ and 5′-GTGGCAGATGGCGCGGCAACACCATT-3′, which amplify a 725-bp product, and were assessed for absence of BAC vector using vector-specific primers 5′-CGGAGTCTGATGCGGTTGCGATG-3′ and 5′-AGTGCTGTTCCCTGGTGCTTCCTC-3′, which amplify a 465-bp product. Three lines of Gdf5-Cre mice were established and maintained on the FVB background. Matings with R26R Cre-inducible LACZ reporter mice (Soriano 1999) were used to test for Cre activity.

Staining for LACZ and HPLAP on whole embryos or sections of embryos was accomplished following established protocols (Lobe et al. 1999). The red LACZ substrate (see Figure 1E) is 6-chloro-3-indoxyl-beta-D-galactopyranoside (Biosynth International, Naperville, Illinois, United States).

General characterization of Bmpr1a mutant mice

Bmpr1a null and floxed alleles (Ahn et al. 2001; Mishina et al. 2002) were obtained on a mixed 129 and C57BL/6 background and maintained by random breeding. Mice carrying the null and floxed alleles were typically mated to Gdf5-Cre mice as shown in Figure 3. The resulting mice are on a mixed 129; C57Bl/6; FVB/N background, with both controls and mutant animals generated as littermates from the same matings. Whole-mount skeletal preparations were made from 34- to 36-d-old mice (Lufkin et al. 1992). Pairs of ears from euthanized 6-mo-old animals were removed, pinned, photographed, projected, and measured from the base of the curve formed between the tragus and antitragus to the farthest point at the edge of the pinnae. Grasping ability in 6-mo-old mice was measured by placing animals on a slender rod and timing how long they could remain suspended on the rod, to a maximum time allowed of 2 min. Data from five consecutive trials for each mouse were averaged. Range of motion assays were conducted on the MT/P1 and P1/P2 joints of the second hindlimb digit from euthanized 18-wk-old animals. Forceps were used to bend the joint to its natural stopping position, and the resulting angle was measured to the nearest 10° under 12.5× magnification using a 360° reticule. Analysis described in this section occurred on animals lacking R26R. Control mice included all nonmutant genotypes generated by Parent 1 being heterozygous for Gdf5-Cre and Bmpr1anull and Parent 2 being heterozygous for Bmpr1afloxP (see Figure 3). All statistical analysis used the Student's t-test or Welch's t-test, and values listed are mean ± standard error of the mean.

Cell death and proliferation assays

Limbs from mutant and control animals at E13.5 and E14.5 were dissected and frozen in OCT (Sakura Finetek,Torrence, CA, United States). Cryosections of tissue were assayed by TUNEL using the In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit, Fluorescein (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Following TUNEL, slides were washed in PBS, blocked with PBS + 0.05% Tween-20 + 5% goat serum, washed again, and incubated with a 1:200 dilution of a rabbit anti-phospho-histone-H3 antibody called Mitosis Marker (Upstate Biotechnology, Lake Placid, New York, United States) to identify cells in mitosis. Cy3-labeled anti-rabbit secondary antibody was used to detect the antibody. Cell nuclei were labeled with DAPI, and slides were mounted in Vectamount (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, California, United States) and visualized at 100× magnification. The area of selected anatomical sites were measured, and the number of TUNEL-labeled nuclear fragments and the number of Cy3-labeled nuclei were counted from three 10-μm sections spanning 50 μm, from three control and three mutant animals. The number of labeled cells in the metacarpal-phalangeal and metatarsal-phalangeal joints was counted in a 290 μm × 365 μm rectangle placed around the center of the joint. The posterior region of the fifth digit was defined by drawing a line from the tip of the digit down 2.15 mm and across to the lateral edge of the tissue. For this analysis, the R26R Cre reporter was not present.

Histology and histochemistry

Tissue from animals ranging from stages E14.5 to P14 was prepared for analysis by fixing in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS for 45 min to 4 h depending on the stage; washing three times in PBS, once in PBS + 15% sucrose for 1 h, and once in PBS + 30% sucrose for 2 h to overnight depending on the stage; and then freezing in OCT. Tissue from animals aged 7 wk to 9 mo was processed similarly to earlier stages except that it was decalcified in 0.5 M EDTA (pH 7.4) for 4 d prior to incubating in sucrose. All solutions were prechilled and used at 4 °C with agitation, and skin from tissues of P0 or older mice was lacerated or removed prior to processing.

Tissue was then cryosectioned at 12 μm and processed. Staining of sections with Safranin O, Fast Green, and Harris' hematoxylin was carried out using standard histological procedures. Detection of LACZ activity with X-Gal was performed as described (Lobe et al. 1999) and was followed by refixing in 4% PFA, rinsing with deionized water, counterstaining with Nuclear Fast Red (Vector Labs), rinsing with water again, and then mounting in Aquamount (Lerner Labs, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States).

RNA in situ hybridization was performed as described (Storm and Kingsley 1996), with the following modifications: (1) Prior to the acetylation step, sections were incubated with 10–20 μg/ml proteinase K for 30 s to 7 min at room temperature (depending on the developmental stage), followed by refixing in 4% PFA and washing three times in PBS; (2) prehybridization step was skipped, and (3) embryonic tissue sections used a different color development mix (Thut et al. 2001). Probes for the following genes have been published previously: Bmpr1a (Mishina et al. 1995), Col2a1 (Metsaranta et al. 1991), Col10a1 (Apte et al. 1992), Gdf5 (Storm and Kingsley 1996), Osteocalcin (Celeste et al. 1986), and Sox5 and Sox6 (Lefebvre et al. 1998). The following probe templates were gifts: Agg, Dr. Vicki Rosen, Genetics Institute; Bmp2 and Bmp4, Arend Sidow, Stanford University; Col1a1, Bjorn Olsen, Harvard Medical School; Bmpr1b, Col3a1, and Mat4 probes were made from ESTs with IMAGE clone numbers 5056341, 478480, and 406027, respectively (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, United States).

Sections for immunohistochemistry were fixed in 4% PFA, then digested with 942–2,000 U/ml type IV-S bovine hyaluronindase (Sigma, St. Louis, Missouri, United States) in PBS (pH 5) at 37 °C for 30 min to 2 h depending on the stage. Slides were then washed in PBS, treated with 0.3% hydrogen peroxide in 100% methanol for 30 min, washed, blocked with PBS + 0.05% Tween20 + 5% goat or fetal bovine serum, washed again, and incubated with primary antibodies in PBS + 0.05% Tween 20 + 1% goat or fetal bovine serum overnight at 4 °C. Biotin-labeled secondary antibodies (Vector Labs) were tagged with HRP using the Vectastain Elite ABC kit (Vector Labs) followed by detection with DAB (Vector Labs). Primary antibodies and dilutions used were: goat anti-mouse MMP13, 1:100 (Chemicon International, Temecula, California, United States); rabbit anti-human SOX9, 1:500 (Morais da Silva et al. 1996); rabbit anti-phosphorylated-SOX9 (SOX9.P), 1:10–1:250 (Huang et al. 2000).

Supporting Information

Accession Numbers

GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nih.gov/Genbank/) accession numbers for the genes discussed in this paper are Gdf5 (AC084323) and Bmpr1a (NM_009758).

Acknowledgements

We thank Gail Martin for the Cre construct (plasmid pML78) and Oliver Bogler for the IRES-hPLAP construct (plasmid 1726); Bjorn Olsen and Benoit de Crombrugghe for antibodies; the following individuals for in situ probe templates: Sophie Candille, Arend Sidow (Bmp2 and Bmp4), Vicki Rosen (Agg), and Bjorn Olsen (Col1a1); Véronique Lefebvre for Sox5 and Sox6 probe templates and useful discussions; Michelle Johnson for help with phenotypic assays on mice; Dr. Corrine Davis for help in evaluating synovial sections; Rebecca Rountree for Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator tips; and members of the Kingsley lab for helpful comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by an NIH predoctoral training grant (RR), a postdoctoral fellowship from the Arthritis Foundation (MS), and grants from the National Institutes of Health (DK). Dr. Kingsley is an associate investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

Abbreviations

BAC - bacterial artificial chromosome

Bmpr1a - bone morphogenetic protein receptor 1a

E[number] - embyonic day [number]

ECM - extracellular matrix

GAC - transgenic line carrying Gdf5-alkaline phosphatase-Cre construct

Gdf5 - growth differentiation factor 5

hPLAP - human placental alkaline phosphatase

IRES - internal ribosome entry site

PFA - paraformaldehyde

R26R - lacZ ROSA26 Cre reporter strain

TGF-β - transforming growth factor β

TUNEL - terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

A Genetic System to Drive Gene Recombination in Developing Joints

(A) A 140-kb BAC from the Gdf5 locus was modified by inserting Cre-IRES-hPLAP into the translation start site of Gdf5 and used to make transgenic mice. Not to scale. See Materials and Methods for details.

(B–E) Visualization of Gdf5-Cre driven recombination patterns based on activation of lacZ expression from the R26R Cre reporter allele. (B) LACZ activity is visible as blue staining in the ear (ea) and the joints of the shoulder (s), elbow (eb), wrist (w), knee (k), ankle (a), vertebra (vj), and phalanges (black arrowheads) of an E14.5 mouse embryo. (C) E14.5 hindlimb double-stained to show both HPLAP expression from the transgene (grey/purple staining) and LACZ expression from the rearranged R26R allele (blue staining). Note that both markers are visible in the oldest, proximal interphalangeal joint (black arrowhead), only HPLAP activity is visible in the more recently formed medial interphalangeal joint (black arrow), and neither HPLAP nor LACZ expression is visible in the youngest, most distal joint of the digit (white arrowhead). (D) Newborn (P0) forelimb with skin partially removed showing LACZ activity expressed in all phalangeal joints (red Salmon gal staining, black arrowheads) and regions of some tendons (asterisk). (E) Section through the most distal phalangeal joint of a P0 hindlimb stained with Alcian blue to mark cartilage showing LACZ expression (stained red) in all tissues of developing joints: articular cartilage (black arrowhead), precursors of ligaments and synovial membranes (black arrow), and cells where cavitation is occurring (asterisk).

Figure 2

Bmpr1a Is Required for Webbing Regression and Apoptosis in Specific Regions of the Limb

(A and B) Control E14.5 forelimb (A) compared to a, E14.5 mutant forelimb (B) showing webbing between digits 1 and 2 (arrowheads) and extra tissue at the posterior of digit 5 (arrows).

(C) Gdf5-Cre induced lacZ expression from R26R in an E13.5 forelimb showing LACZ staining (blue) in metacarpal-phalangeal joints, between digits 1 and 2 (arrowhead), and in a region posterior to digit 5 (arrow).

(D and E) Sections of E14.5 hindlimbs showing apoptosis visualized by TUNEL staining (green) and proliferation visualized by staining for histone H3 phosphorylation (red). Controls show strong, uniform TUNEL staining between digits 1 and 2 (D, arrowhead) while mutants show patchy TUNEL staining interspersed with mitotic cells in similar regions (E). Scale bar = 200 μm.

(F) Quantitation of TUNEL staining and mitotic cells in the posterior region of the fifth digit shows apoptosis is reduced 30% while proliferation is increased 20% (asterisks indicate statistically significant difference).

(G and H) By E15.5, interdigital tissue has regressed in controls (G, arrowhead). In contrast, tissue remains in mutants at this location, primarily derived from cells that have undergone Gdf5-Cre-mediated recombination that inactivates Bmpr1a function and activates expression of LACZ (H). Scale bar = 75 μm.

Figure 3

Gdf5-Cre-Mediated Deletion of Bmpr1a

(A) Breeding strategy simultaneously deletes Bmpr1afloxP and allows visualization of Gdf5-Cre-mediated recombination by lacZ expression from R26R.

(B–E) 5-week-old mutant and control mice stained with Alcian blue to mark cartilage and alizarin red to mark bone. (B) Ankle of control with strong blue staining lining each joint (arrowheads). (C) Ankle of mutant showing an absence of blue staining in most regions (arrowheads) and a joint fusion between the central (c) and second (2) tarsals (arrow). (D) Control and (E) mutant metatarsal/phalangeal joint which lacks blue staining in articular regions (arrowheads) but retains staining in the growth plate (asterisks).

(F) Control forelimb.

(G) Mutant forelimb with webbing between the first and second digit (black arrowhead).

Figure 4

Bmpr1a Is Expressed in Joints and Is Required for Continued Joint Formation in the Ankle Region

(A) Diagram of ankle bones from a wild-type mouse; bones fusing in mutant are colored red. Roman numerals II–IV, metatarsals; 2, 3, and 4/5, distal row of tarsal bones; c, central tarsal bone; ta, talus; ca, calcaneus.

(B and C) In situ hybridization at E15.5 showing that Bmpr1a is expressed in ankle joint interzones (B, arrowheads) and in the forming articular regions of the phalangeal joints (C, arrowheads).

(D) Near adjacent section to (C) showing Gdf5-Cre induced LACZ expression from R26R in the forming joints of the digits (arrowheads).

(E–J) Marker gene expression and R26R LACZ staining patterns on near adjacent sections of control and mutant embryos. In control mice at E15.5 ankle joints are clearly delineated as regions that have down-regulated Col2 (E), express Gdf5 throughout (F), and express LACZ in most cells (G; white arrowheads and black arrows). In mutant embryos at the same stage, joint formation is incomplete. Faint Col2 expression can be seen connecting a medial region of tarsal 2 with metatarsal II (H, white arrowhead), and Gdf5 expression does not extend all the way across the joint at this location (I, white arrowhead). Between tarsals c and 2, mutants express Col2 across the normal joint-forming region (H, black arrow) and lack expression of Gdf5 at sites where skeletal fusions are observed (I, black arrow and bracket). (J) Scale bar = 100 μm.

Figure 5

Bmpr1a Is Required to Maintain Expression of ECM Components in Articular Cartilage

In situ hybridization or LACZ staining on near adjacent sections of metacarpal-phalangeal joints (A–C and F–H) and the tarsal 2-metatarsal II joint (D–E and I–J) of P0 mice. At birth, articular cartilage of controls (A–E) and mutants (F–J) appears similar by Safranin O staining (A and F), and Col2 expression (B, G). Mat4 expression confirms that articular cartilage is initially specified in mutants (D andI, brackets). LACZ expression confirms Cre-mediated recombination has occurred in articular cartilage (C, H, E, and J). (K–T) Near adjacent sections of the metacarpal-phalangeal joints of P14 mice. Two weeks after birth, articular cartilage of controls stains with pericellular Safranin O (orange staining, K), and expresses Col2 (L), Agg (M), and SOX9 (N). In contrast, mutant articular cells are smaller and more densely packed, lack pericellular Safranin O staining (P), have reduced expression of Col2 (Q) and Agg (R), but retain normal levels of SOX9 protein (S, brackets; dashed line marks faint edges of articular surfaces). LACZ expression confirms Cre-mediated recombination has occurred in articular cells (O ansd T, brackets). (A and K) Scale bar = 75 μm.

Figure 6

Synovial Membrane Expansion, Articular Surface Erosion, and Accelerated Maturation of Underlying Cartilage in Ankles of Bmpr1a Mutant Mice

Near adjacent sections from the tarsal 2-metatarsal II joint of 7-d-old mice. (A and B) LACZ staining (blue) shows Cre-mediated recombination is largely restricted to articular (arrowheads) and synovial cells (asterisks) in both controls and mutants. (C and D) In situ hybridization shows Col10 expression expands in mutants toward regions of synovial membrane expansion and articular surface erosion (brackets and arrows). This may be a cell nonautonomous effect of joint damage, since the LACZ expressing cells at the articular surface do not show upregulation of Col10 (arrowheads) and the region of expanded Col10 expression is largely made up of cells that have not undergone Cre-mediated recombination. Note the formation of a cartilaginous bridge along the joint capsule of the mutant where joint formation is disrupted at earlier stages (B, white arrowhead, and Figure 3, white arrowheads). (A) Scale bar = 75 μm.

Figure 7

Loss of Bmpr1a Signaling Leads to Articular Cartilage Fibrillation and Degeneration in Digits and Knees of Aging Mice

(A–D) Near adjacent sections of metatarsal-phalangeal joints from 9 month old mice. Articular cartilage of controls is complete and stains strongly with Safranin O (A, orange stain). In contrast, articular cells of mutants are severely fibrillated or absent with much reduced staining of Safranin O (C, arrowheads). LACZ expression confirms Cre-mediated recombination has occurred in articular cells (B and D).

(E–P) Sagittal sections through knee joints of 7-wk- (E–J) or 9-mo-old animals (K–P); fe, femur; ti, tibia; gp, growth plate. Seven weeks after birth, the height of the tibial epiphysis is reduced in mutants (E and H, bars), and their articular layer stains poorly with Safranin O, is fibrillated, and is strikingly thinner (F and I, black arrowhead, and brackets). Near adjacent sections with LACZ staining confirm Cre-mediated recombination has occurred in articular cells (G and J). Note that in mutants, LACZ is absent in cells adjacent to those that do stain with Safranin O, suggesting Bmpr1a may act cell autonomously (I and J, white arrowheads). At 9 mo old, the mutant tibial epiphysis is extremely thin (K and N, bars), and the articular layer is completely absent, leaving bone to rub directly on bone (L and O, bracket). LACZ staining shows Cre-mediated recombination occurred in articular cells of controls (M) and in some remaining skeletal tissue of mutants (P). Also note aberrantly formed meniscal cartilage in mutants (E, H, K, and N, arrows), and increased sclerosis in mutant epiphyses (E, H, K, and N, asterisks).

(A and K) Scale bar = 50 μm; (I) scale bar = 300 μm.

Footnotes

Conflicts of interest. The authors have declared that no conflicts of interest exist.

Author contributions. RBR, MS, and DMK conceived and designed the experiments. RBR and MEM performed the experiments. RBR, HC, and DMK analyzed the data. MS, HC, VH, and YM contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools. RBR and DMK wrote the paper.

Academic Editor: Lee Niswander, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center

¤ Current address: ARTEMIS Pharmaceuticals, an Exelixis Company, Köln, Germany

Citation: Rountree RB, Schoor M, Chen H, Marks ME, Harley V, et al. (2004) BMP receptor signaling is required for postnatal maintenance of articular cartilage. PLoS Biol 2(11): e355.A Chemoattractant Role for NT-3 in Proprioceptive Axon Guidance

Abstract

Neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) is required for proprioceptive neuron survival. Deletion of the proapoptotic gene Bax in NT-3 knockout mice rescues these neurons and allows for examination of their axon growth in the absence of NT-3 signaling. TrkC-positive peripheral and central axons from dorsal root ganglia follow proper trajectories and arrive in close proximity to their targets but fail to innervate them. Peripherally, muscle spindles are absent and TrkC-positive axons do not enter their target muscles. Centrally, proprioceptive axons branch in ectopic regions of the spinal cord, even crossing the midline. In vitro assays reveal chemoattractant effects of NT-3 on dorsal root ganglion axons. Our results show that survival factor NT-3 acts as a short-distance axon guidance molecule for muscle sensory afferents as they approach their proper targets.

Introduction

Neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) is a key requirement for the development of proprioceptive inputs to motor neurons (Chen and Frank 1999; Chen et al. 2003). Mice deficient in NT-3, its tyrosine kinase receptor, TrkC, or in TrkC-positive neuron-specific transcription factor Runx3 display severe ataxia associated with the absence of muscle spindles, and loss of proprioceptive neurons in dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) or their axons (Ernfors et al. 1994; Klein et al. 1994; Tessarollo et al. 1994; Fariñas et al. 1996; Liebl et al. 1997; Inoue et al. 2002; Levanon et al. 2002). NT-3 is expressed in the ventral spinal cord, in the developing limb buds, and in intrafusal bag fibers of muscle spindles later in development (Copray and Brouwer 1994; Fariñas et al. 1996; Tojo et al. 1996). When sensory axons contact developing myotubes, they induce muscle spindle differentiation, forming ring-like spiral nerve endings around them. In the chicken embryo, limb ablations or anti-NT-3 antibody injections into limb buds lead to elimination of TrkC-positive neurons and decreased innervation of motor neurons (Oakley et al. 1995, 1997). Is NT-3 only a chemotrophic survival factor for muscle sensory afferents, or does it have additional roles in the development of the proprioceptors and the establishment of the monosynaptic reflex arc? Here we provide evidence that NT-3 acts as a chemoattractant for sensory axons during the final phase of their target-directed pathfinding.

Results

TrkC-Positive DRG Neurons Are Rescued in Bax/NT-3 Double Knockout Mice

Mice lacking proapoptotic protein Bax allow for distinguishing survival effects of neurotrophins from other effects. Bax-deficient sensory neurons no longer require neurotrophins for survival (White et al. 1998; Patel et al. 2000), thus they can be used to examine axonal effects. We bred NT-3 heterozygote and Bax knockout (KO) mice to obtain mice with double KO of both NT-3 and Bax genes, and examined proprioceptive axonal projections. All NT-3 and double KOs died within 48 h after birth (Tessarollo et al. 1994). We performed TrkA/TrkC double immunohistochemistry (Huang et al. 1999), enabling detection of both proteins in the same sample. TrkC-positive cells (Figure 1A) and fibers (Figure 1E) were absent in NT-3 KOs at embryonic day (E) 15. Two subsets of DRG cells expressing either TrkA or TrkC were detected in double KOs, similar to wild-type (WT) or Bax KO animals. Surprisingly, at postnatal day (P) 0, a few cells expressed TrkC even in NT-3 KO animals in the Bax+/+ genetic background, and some cells co-expressed TrkA and TrkC, regardless of the genotype (Figure 1B). In order to quantify our results, we analyzed the ratio of TrkA and TrkC immunopositive cells from four different DRGs of animals of different genotypes. At all ages studied, Bax/NT-3 double null DRGs had TrkA/TrkC ratios similar to those of Bax null DRGs, and higher than those of NT-3 null DRGs (Figure 1D). TrkC-positive neurons rescued by Bax deletion, however, failed to differentiate properly, as evidenced by the lack of expression of the proprioceptive molecular marker Parvalbumin (PV) (Figure 1C).

NT-3 Is Necessary for Proper Innervation of Motor Neurons

TrkA/TrkC-positive fibers in the spinal cord could be detected at E15 (Figure 1E). TrkA-positive fibers were restricted to and terminated in the dorsolateral spinal cord, whereas TrkC-positive fibers entered the cord dorsomedially, and descended into the ventral horns in WT (Ozaki and Snider 1997) and Bax KO embryos. There was no detectable TrkC expression in NT-3 KO spinal cord, indicating complete absence of proprioceptive fibers. In double KO spinal cord, TrkC-positive fibers entered the dorsal spinal cord and descended medially in a manner similar to that seen in WT or Bax KO cases. However, it was not possible to follow TrkC immunolabeled fibers all the way to their terminal zones in any of the cases. Next we examined the central projections of DRG axons with the lipophilic tracer DiI at P0. In WT and Bax KO pups, proprioceptive afferents entered the dorsal spinal cord and followed a medial course towards the ventral horn. They then turned laterally towards motor neurons in the lateral motor column, where they branched and terminated (Figure 2A). DiI labeling was confined to dorsal spinal cord in NT-3 KOs (Figure 2A), as reported earlier, consistent with a complete absence of proprioceptive innervation (Ernfors et al. 1994; Tessarollo et al. 1994). In double KOs, proprioceptive afferents initially followed a trajectory similar to that of WT counterparts, but most of them failed to project all the way to the ventral cord and into the lateral motor column. Instead, they arborized near the ventral midline; some crossed the midline and extended into the contralateral ventral cord (Figure 2A and 2C). In order to distinguish between a role for NT-3 in initiation of motor neuron innervation and a role for maintenance, we repeated the DiI labeling at E17. Innervation patterns of E17 spinal cords (Figure 3) were similar to those at P0 (Figure 2). Dorsal horns of all genotypes were filled with DiI-labeled fibers corresponding to nerve growth factor–dependent nociceptive axons. In WT and Bax KO embryos, proprioceptive fibers extended towards ventral horn motor neurons (Figure 3A and 3B), whereas the ventral horns of the NT-3 KO embryos were devoid of innervation (Figure 3C). In the Bax/NT-3 double KOs, DiI-labeled fibers entered the ventral spinal cord, but extended towards the midline instead of the ventral horn (Figure 3D), in a pattern similar to that observed at P0. Our data point to a complete absence of proprioceptive innervation of the ventral horn of the Bax/NT-3 null spinal cord throughout the developmental stages investigated. As the sensory axons never reach motor neuron dendrites in the ventral horn (Figure S1), the stretch reflex arc circuit is not established. The failure to initiate contact between sensory axons and motor neurons in the absence of NT-3 suggests a requirement for NT-3 for proper axon targeting in addition to a role in sensory axon maintenance.

NT-3 Is Required for Proper Peripheral Innervation

In order to study peripheral innervation in double KO animals, we investigated spindle development in the gastrocnemius muscle. Muscle spindles could be identified easily in P0 WT and Bax KO animals by their characteristic morphology (Figure 4A and 4B). Proprioceptive fibers labeled with neurofilament-M (NF-M) antibody formed ring-like spiral endings wrapped around intrafusal bag fibers labeled with S46 antibody, specific for slow developmental myosin heavy chain protein (Miller et al. 1985). As reported earlier, there were no muscle spindles in NT-3 KO animals (Ernfors et al. 1994). On the other hand, Bax KO animals had more spindles than WT, and spindles were in clusters similar to animals over-expressing NT-3 in the muscle (Wright et al. 1997). Although NT-3-dependent cells were rescued, no muscle spindles were detected in the limbs of double KOs (Figure 4A and 4B). Muscle spindles could be observed with TrkC antibody in WT and Bax KO animals, but not in NT-3 or double KOs (Figure 4E). In both NT-3 and double KO animals, NF-M-labeled fibers could be detected in muscles, thus the muscles of these animals were not completely devoid of nerve fibers. Since there were no TrkC-positive fibers in these muscles, we think that these NF-M-labeled fibers correspond to motor axons. Absence of muscle spindles might be due to a failure in initiation of differentiation by proprioceptive axons, or a failure of maturation and maintenance in the absence of NT-3. To distinguish between these two possibilities, we investigated muscle spindle development at E15 and E17 with S46/NF-M immunostaining as well as DiI labeling. No structures with the characteristic muscle spindle shape could be detected in any of the genotypes at E15 (Figure S2). However, numerous developing spindles could be identified at E17 in WT and Bax KOs, but not in NT-3 KO embryos (Figure 4C). Bax/NT-3 double null muscles were devoid of spindles (Figure 4C), except for one spindle-like structure observed in one leg of an embryo (Figure 4C, inset, denoted by the asterisk). DiI labeling through the DRGs at E17 yielded similar results, with muscle spindles identified in parallel sections in WT and Bax null muscles (Figure 4D), but not in NT-3 or double KO animals. Although DiI-labeled fibers could be detected in double null muscles, they never formed ring-like structures characteristic of muscle spindles. We also examined TrkA/TrkC expression at P0 in the tibial nerve, which carries sensory fibers to the gastrocnemius muscle as well as the skin of the lower leg. In NT-3 KOs, TrkA-positive axons could be seen in the tibial nerve but there were no TrkC-positive axons; in contrast, TrkA- and TrkC-labeled axons are both present in WT, Bax KO, and double KO animals (Figure 4F). These results suggest that although proprioceptive axons follow proper trajectories in distal peripheral nerves, they fail to innervate their target muscles in the absence of NT-3.

NT-3 Is a Chemoattractant for DRG Axons In Vitro

To test the hypothesis that NT-3 acts as a chemoattractant for sensory axons, we performed a series of in vitro assays. Proprioceptive axons in mice enter the gray matter in the spinal cord and advance ventrally parallel to the midline by E13 and reach the motor neurons by E15 (Ozaki and Snider 1994). We co-cultured collagen-embedded E13 WT DRG explants with NT-3-soaked sepharose beads (n = 26). Control cultures were set up using bovine serum albumin (BSA)– or phosphate buffer saline (PBS)–soaked beads (n = 12). DRG axons began extending towards the localized NT-3 source by the end of the first day and consistently displayed a strong chemoattraction by 3 d in vitro, whereas they did not show such preference for BSA-loaded control beads (Figure 5A and 5B). This attraction was not due to survival support of NT-3 because Bax null ganglia displayed the same chemoattraction (Figure 5C; n = 16). NT-3 may act through either TrkC, or the p75NTR. We repeated the co-culture experiments with DRG explants derived from p75NTR KO mice (n = 18). Axons of these ganglia also showed strong chemoattraction towards the NT-3 beads (Figure 5D). Finally, we used diffusible TrkC receptors conjugated to IgG constant regions (TrkC-Fc) added to the medium (n = 6) to deplete soluble NT-3 from the collagen gels (Figure 5E). In the presence of TrkC-Fc the chemoattraction was completely blocked, demonstrating that the effect we see is specific for NT-3. In order to investigate the active range of our beads, we have repeated the cultures with WT E13 DRGs by placing the beads at increasing distances from the ganglia (n = 4 each) (Figure 5F). There was still preferred growth towards the bead at 1,200μm, the longest distance studied, although the number of axons and the extent of growth were not as robust. Next, we set up E13 DRG spinal cord explant cultures using NT-3-loaded beads placed at the midline at mid-spinal cord level as an ectopic NT-3 source (n = 15). Control cultures were set using PBS-loaded beads (n = 6). DiI labeling through the DRGs revealed numerous fibers entering the spinal cord at ectopic regions and growing towards the NT-3 beads (Figure 6A), surrounding the beads and forming bundles around them (Figure 6C–6E). In control cultures, all labeled fibers were directed towards the dorsal spinal cord and terminated there, where they normally enter the gray matter at E13 (Figure 6B). No axons were observed around the PBS-loaded control beads (Figure 6F). Axons that normally enter the gray matter through dorsal spinal cord grow towards the midline when presented with a localized NT-3 source, and new axon growth towards the NT-3 bead is initiated from DRGs, entering the spinal cord at ectopic loci at lateral mid-spinal cord (Figure 6G). NT-3 is therefore capable of acting as a chemoattractant for DRG axons.

Discussion

Relatively few studies have implicated NT-3 as a chemoattractant agent for sensory and motor axons. Previously noted chemoattractant action of the embryonic mouse maxillary process on trigeminal ganglion neurons (Lumsden and Davies 1986) is now attributed to NT-3 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (O'Connor et al. 1999). Recently, Tucker et al. (2001) showed that developing sensory and motor axons in limb slice cultures preferentially grow towards neurotrophin-soaked beads instead of following their normal trajectories. Conversely, beads soaked with neurotrophin function-blocking antibodies led to reduction of sensory and motor axon growth towards the limb. In transgenic mice, which over-express NT-3 under the nestin promoter in the central nervous system, the course of the proprioceptive afferents are altered and directed towards the regions with high levels of ectopic NT-3 expression in the spinal cord (Ringstedt et al. 1997). Ringstedt et al. considered the possibility that NT-3 may play a chemoattractant role during the innervation of ventral horns by proprioceptive afferents. However, earlier findings of normal proprioceptive afferent trajectories in chicken embryos despite injection of function-blocking NT-3 antibody into the spinal cord (Oakley et al. 1995) led them to discount this possibility. In that study, though, assays on the effectiveness of antibody perturbation on NT-3-dependent cell survival showed that effectiveness was significant (approximately 90%) but not complete (Oakley et al. 1995). Ringstedt et al. (1997) argue that while central sensory axons may still navigate properly in the absence of NT-3, ectopic expression of NT-3 disrupts their targeting. Recently, another member of the neurotrophin family, BDNF, has been suggested to act as a chemoattractant for sensory axons innervating ear (Tessarollo et al. 2004). In a gene replacement strategy in which BDNF expression was driven by the NT-3 promoter, vestibular axons rerouted towards ectopic sources of BDNF in the cochlea that normally expressed NT-3 and were not innervated by these axons. Ectopic NT-3 supplied using osmotic pumps and adenovirus-mediated expression induce sensory axon growth during regeneration (Zhang et al. 1998, Bradbury et al. 1999, Oudega et al. 1999, Ramer et al. 2002), and induce axonal plasticity of corticospinal axons in injured adult spinal cord (Zhou et al. 2003), where the sprouting axons from the intact site cross the midline towards the NT-3 source on the lesion side of the spinal cord. Our present results are in agreement with these observations, and provide further evidence that NT-3 acts as a chemoattractant for sensory afferents.

Previously, normal motor neuron innervation was rescued in NT-3 KO animals by over-expressing NT-3 selectively in their muscles (Wright et al. 1997). It appears that peripheral NT-3 alone is sufficient for rescuing proprioceptive neurons in NT-3 KO animals and proper axonal pathfinding in the spinal cord. However, it is unclear whether NT-3 is absent from the ventral spinal cords of these animals. The possibility has been raised that motor neurons may retrogradely transport NT-3 in muscle to the spinal cord (Chen and Frank 1999). Assays to determine whether any NT-3 is present in the ventral horns of these mice would be informative.

Recently, Patel et al. (2003) reported their observations on Bax/NT-3 double KO mice they bred. Their results are significantly different from ours. They see no proprioceptive afferents in the periphery of the double knockouts and note that central proprioceptive afferents terminate in the intermediate spinal cord without extending ventrally. Their observations are based on PV immunostaining and DiI labeling of the peripheral nerves. We noted that PV immunolabeling is diminished in our Bax/NT-3 double KOs. In various manipulations of the neurotrophins it has been noted that molecular markers for proprioceptive axons such as PV or calcitonin gene-related peptide for nerve growth factor–responsive axons are compromised (Ringstedt et al. 1997; Patel et al. 2000), thus PV immunostaining in Bax/NT-3 double KOs cannot reveal the extent of proprioceptive axons in the periphery.

Seventy-three percent of retrogradely labeled gastrocnemius muscle afferents were reported to be expressing TrkC RNA in the adult rat DRG, although some of these (about 10%) may represent cutaneous innervation (McMahon et al. 1994). Presently, it is not clear whether TrkC protein is also made by cutaneous afferents and if so at what stage in development this receptor is expressed by cutaneous axons. Based on the available evidence showing that all proprioceptive neurons are eliminated in NT-3 or TrkC null mice, we think that TrkC staining in the tibial nerve mostly represents proprioceptive axons in the vicinity of their peripheral target. Altogether, our findings suggest a role for NT-3 in initiation of muscle innervation and spindle differentiation by the proprioceptive axons.

Patel et al. (2003) examined DiI-labeled central DRG axons in the spinal cord of three E17 and two P0 cases, and report that central proprioceptive axons stop in the intermediate laminae, never entering the ventral cord. We have examined nine Bax/NT-3 double KO cases, and often incomplete DiI labeling gives the impression that there are no axons reaching the ventral spinal cord. We have also seen cases similar to theirs (n = 4), but at higher magnification these axons did not have terminal boutons and were not completely labeled. However, with complete fills (n = 5), it was possible to trace these axons into the ventral midline and across to the contralateral side, and visualize terminal boutons at their tips (see Figure 3C). Previously, Arber et al. (2000) reported that members of the Ets family of transcription factors, Er81 and Pea3, are expressed by DRG neurons as well as motor neurons and their target muscle fibers. They found that in the spinal cord of Er81 KO mice, ventral projections of proprioceptive axons were mostly absent, and very few axons made it to the ventral cord. Patel et al. (2003) note that the phenotype they observed in their Bax/NT-3 double KO mice is quite similar to that of Er81 KO mice. They provide evidence that NT-3 induces Er81 expression in DRG explants in vitro. Patel et al. (2003) report that Er81 mRNA expression is diminished (but not abolished) in both NT-3 KO and Bax/NT-3 double KO mice, while their immunohistochemistry shows much less protein expression in the double KO mice. It is highly possible that a small but considerable number of DRG cells express the transcription factor Er81 and that their axons grow beyond the intermediate levels of the spinal cord in Bax/NT-3 double KO mice. While the phenotype of Er81 KO mice is quite dramatic, and most proprioceptive axons stop within the intermediate spinal cord, it is important to note that a few axons still find their way to the ventral spinal cord and target properly to the motor neurons (Arber et al. 2000).

Patel et al. (2003) also present observations from islet2DTA mice, which lack a significant portion of the motor neurons in the ventral cord. In these mice PV immunostaining shows axons in the ventral horns. Patel et al. argue that since motor neurons are absent in these mice, NT-3 secreted by them could not be a signal for proprioceptive axons to enter the lateral motor columns. However, there is no evidence showing that NT-3 mRNA or protein expressed in the ventral spinal cord is exclusively from motor neurons, and there are no available data indicating that in islet2DTA mice, NT-3 expression in the ventral spinal cord is abolished (Yang et al. 2001; Pun et al. 2002). Studies in embryonic mice reported NT-3 mRNA in the ventral horns of the spinal cord, but it is not definitive that both mRNA and protein are expressed solely by motor neurons. In the adult spinal cord, while motor neurons express high levels of NT-3, other cells, including glia, also express it (Zhou and Rush 1994; Dreyfus et al. 1999; Buck et al. 2000). Our present results, along with those from transgenic mice with NT-3 over-expression in ectopic regions of the spinal cord (Ringstedt et al. 1997), argue for a role of NT-3 in chemoattractant axon guidance of proprioceptive axons in the spinal cord.

Finally, in culture assays, we see a strong chemoattraction of DRG neurons to localized sources of NT-3. This response is seen in WT, Bax null and in p75 null DRG explants, and in the absence of any other neurotrophins or target-derived axon guidance molecules. Furthermore, in vitro, sensory axon response to NT-3 does not appear to be dose-dependent (Ringstedt et al. 1997; Tucker et al. 2001). NT-3 is capable of attracting axons along distances of up to 1 mm in collagen gel matrix, covering the physiological range it needs to attract axons during development. Previous studies with exogenous or local applications of NT-3 to developing primary sensory axons have indicated that this neurotrophin can attract and induce axonal branching (Ulupınar et al. 2000; Özdinler and Erzurumlu 2001, Özdinler et al. 2004).

Along the monosynaptic stretch reflex pathway, only Wnt-3 has been implicated as an axon arborization factor in the spinal cord (Krylova et al. 2002). Another molecule, Slit2, expressed in the midline and by motor neurons (Wang et al. 1999) is capable of inducing axonal branching (Nguyen Ba-Charvet et al. 2001; Özdinler and Erzurumlu 2002). DRG neurons express Robo receptors, which bind to Slits, and proprioceptive axons are therefore capable of responding to Slit signals (Wang et al. 1999). Slit2 does not cause repulsion of NT-3-responsive DRG axons in vitro (Nguyen Ba-Charvet et al. 2001), but causes ectopic branching and arborization of trigeminal axons in the brainstem (Özdinler and Erzurumlu 2002). Thus, Slit2 might also be involved in terminal branching of propioceptive axons in the ventral cord and in the midline branching observed in our double KOs.

Lack of PV expression in Bax/NT-3 KO mice suggests that PV expression might be responsible for proper axon targeting and muscle spindle differentiation. Presently we cannot completely rule out this possibility. However, no defects in axon pathfinding along the monosynaptic reflex arc or in muscle spindle differentiation have been noted in PV KO mice, which develop normally and show no apparent changes in their behavior or physical activity (Schwaller et al. 1999). These observations suggest that axonal targeting defects in Bax/NT-3 double KO mice cannot be simply due to lack of PV expression in proprioceptive cells.

Our present results suggest that NT-3 acts as a short-range axon guidance cue for proprioceptive axons centrally and peripherally, as they navigate to their targets using other axon guidance cues. In its absence, these axons terminate in inappropriate loci. However, NT-3 may not be the only molecule that plays a role in targeting and terminal branching of sensory axons in the ventral spinal cord. NT-3 most likely acts cooperatively with other axon guidance molecules or by regulating expression of yet to be identified proprioceptive neuron-specific receptors/ligands for numerous axon guidance cues.

Materials and Methods



Generation of double KOs.

We crossed Bax KO females on a C57BL/6 background (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, United States) to NT-3 heterozygote males on a 129 Sv background to generate double heterozygote animals. Progeny was genotyped with PCR, and animals heterozygous for both genes were bred to obtain the double KOs. Primers used for the Bax locus were R661, GTT GAC CAG AGT GGC GTA GG; R662, CCG CTT CCA TTG CTC AGC GG; and R663, GAG CTG ATC AGA ACC ATC ATG. Primers used for the NT-3 locus were NT3A, CGT GGT GAG GTT CTA TTG GCT AC; NT3B, CAG AGC ACC CTG CCC AAA GCA GAG; NT3R, CCT TGA CAA TAC TGA ATG CC; and NEOF, GGG AAC TTC CTG ACT AGG. WT, Bax KO, and NT-3 KO littermates were used as controls. A total of 11 Bax/NT-3 double KO mice were analyzed, of these nine were P0 pups. The p75 colony on a 129 S1 background was received from Jackson Laboratory. We used tail DNA to genotype animals using the primers IMR0013, CTT GGG TGG AGA GGC TAT TC; IMR0014, AGG TGA GAT GAC AGG AGA TC (generic neo primers); IMR0710, TGT TAC GTT CTC TGA CGT GGT GAG; and IMR0711, TCA GCC CAG GGT GTG CAC TC (p75 locus). For embryonic experiments, day of plug positivity was considered E0. All of the protocols used in this study were approved by the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and conformed to the National Institutes of Health guidelines for use of experimental animals.

TrkA/TrkC immunohistochemistry.

Frozen spinal cord sections (10 μm thick) were blocked and incubated in a cocktail of rabbit anti-TrkA and goat anti-TrkC antibodies (gift of Dr. Reichardt; Huang et al. 1999), followed by a cocktail of CY3 conjugated donkey anti-rabbit and FITC conjugated donkey anti-goat antibodies (Chemicon, Temecula, California, United States) in the presence of 0.3% TritonX-100 and 10% normal donkey serum. For PV immunohistochemistry, sections were reacted with monoclonal mouse anti-PV antibody (Sigma, St. Louis, Missouri, United States), and developed by Vector fluorescein mouse on mouse kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, California, United States). For quantification purposes, TrkA- and TrkC-labeled cells from four different DRGs of each genotype and age studied were counted, and ratios plotted.

Muscle spindle detection.

Gastrocnemius muscle was dissected out in P0 pups and sectioned longitudinally, or, in some cases, the whole leg at the level of gastrocnemius muscle with tibial nerve was sectioned in cross section. Sections were incubated with monoclonal S46 antibody (gift of Dr. Stockdale) reactive to the spindle-specific slow-tonic myosin heavy chain isoform and developed by Vector mouse on mouse kit as described above, followed by rabbit anti-NF-M antibody (Chemicon) and CY3 conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody (Chemicon) in a sequential double-labeling protocol. In another method, DiI crystals were placed in DRGs of E17 embryos from different genotypes (n = 2), and the gastrocnemius muscle was isolated and sectioned into 40-μm-thick slices on a vibratome.

DiI labeling.

Spinal cords were dissected out with the DRGs attached, motor root was cut to prevent backfilling of motor neurons, and crystals of 1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate (DiI; Molecular Probes, Eugene, Oregon, United States) were inserted in DRGs. Labeled spinal cords were incubated at 37 °C for 8 d and sectioned on a vibrotome at 100 μm. Sections were observed under the fluorescent microscope and photographed, and images were transferred to Adobe Photoshop, inverted, and adjusted for brightness and contrast. Photoconverted in 0.15% DAB (3,3′-diaminobenzidine; Sigma) in 0.1M Tris buffer (pH 8.2).

In vitro co-culture assay.

DRG explants were derived from Swiss Webster, Bax null, and p75 null mouse embryos (E13). For collagen matrix assays, DRGs were dissected out under a stereomicroscope using tungsten needles. Collagen matrix was prepared with 430 μl of collagen (3 mg/ml dissolved in 0.1M acetic acid, Sigma), 50 μl of 10X DMEM medium, and 2.5 μl of 0.8 M NaCa2, and the pH was adjusted to 7.5. Individual ganglion explants were placed in 24-well plates and covered with freshly prepared collagen. Sepharose beads with an average diameter of 150 μm were used. Beads were washed twice with PBS, air dried, and loaded with 10, 20, 50, or 100 ng/μl NT-3 (Collaborative Research, Chemicon) at 4 °C overnight with constant shaking. For negative control, beads were loaded with BSA (10–100 ng/μl) or PBS. Either a single neurotrophin-loaded bead or a single BSA (or PBS)–loaded bead was implanted about 200–1,200 μm away from the ganglion explant. Collagen-embedded cultures were then placed at 33 °C for 15 min for the matrix to harden. Serum-free culture medium was then added to each well. In cultures with WT DRG and control beads, 10% serum was added to ensure viability of the explants. TrkC-Fc (Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Tarrytown, New York, United States) was added (20 μg/ml) into the culture medium.

Explant co-cultures

Spinal cords with attached DRGs were dissected out from Swiss Webster mouse embryos at E13, and sectioned into 300-μm-thick slices. Tissue slices were placed on Millicell Tissue Culture Inserts (Millipore, Billrica, Massachusetts, United States). NT-3-loaded (n = 15) or PBS-loaded (n = 6) sepharose beads were prepared as described above, and placed in the midline at mid-spinal cord level. Inserts were placed in six-well plates with serum-free medium at the bottom of the wells, and kept at 33 °C for 3 d in the presence of 5% CO2. Cultures were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS, and small crystals of DiI were placed into the DRGs. Samples were incubated in a 37-°C incubator, allowing the dye to diffuse, and photographed under a Nikon (Tokyo, Japan) inverted epifluoresence microscope.

Supporting Information

Figure S1

Motor Neuron Innervation Initiated in WT E17 Embryos Cannot Be Detected in Bax/NT-3 Double KOs

In some of the samples, motor neurons were labeled by backfilling through the ventral root in addition to the sensory axons labeled through the DRGs.

(A) WT embryo showing proprioceptive axons contacting motor neuron dendrites in the ventral horn, forming synapses.

(B) Bax/NT-3 double null spinal cord. Although labeled fibers enter the ventral spinal cord, they extend towards the midline instead of the ventral horn and never contact the motor neuron dendrites.

(C) High-power image of the inset in (A). Arrows point to the proprioceptive fibers contacting motor neurons (asterisk).

(D) High-power image of the inset in (B). Notice that there are no sensory axons contacting labeled motor neurons (asterisk).

Scale bar: 100 μm (A and B), 50 μm (C and D).

(24 MB TIF).

Click here for additional data file.

Figure S2

S46/NF-M Immunohistochemistry at E15 Gastrocnemius Muscle

Although numerous muscle and nerve fibers were labeled, no muscle spindles could be identified because the characteristic morphology of sensory nerve ending wrapped around muscle bag fiber had not begun to develop in any of the genotypes yet. Scale bar: 25 μm.

(13 MB TIF).

Click here for additional data file.

Acknowledgements

We thank L. Tessarollo for providing NT-3 KO animals, L. Reichardt for TrkA and TrkC antibodies, F. Stockdale for the S46 antibody, K. Muneoka for sepharose beads, and B. King for maintenance of animals used in this study. We particularly thank E. Frank for many helpful comments and discussions about this study and for sharing unpublished data from his laboratory. Supported by National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research grant P01 DE07734.

Abbreviations

BDNF - brain-derived neurotrophic factor

BSA - bovine serum albumin

DRG - dorsal root ganglion

E - embryonic day

KO - knockout

NF-M - neurofilament-M

NT-3 - neurotrophin-3

P - postnatal day

PBS - phosphate buffer saline

PV - parvalbumin

TrkC-Fc - diffusible TrkC receptors conjugated to IgG constant regions

WT - wild-type

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

TrkA/TrkC and PV Immunohistochemistry in DRG and Spinal Cord

Red represents TrkA, green represents TrkC (and PV in [C]), and yellow represents co-expression.

(A) TrkA/TrkC immunostaining in E15 DRG. TrkC-positive neurons normally eliminated in NT-3 KOs are rescued in double KOs.

(B) TrkA/TrkC immunostaining at P0 in DRG.

(C) PV immunostaining in P0 DRG. Rescued TrkC-positive cells fail to express PV.

(D) Ratio of TrkA-immunopositive cells to TrkC-immunopositive cells in E15 and P0 DRGs. Data are presented as percentage of cells with standard deviation. Double KOs always had similar ratios to Bax KOs, and NT-3 KOs had the least amount of TrkC-positive cells, if any.

(E) TrkA/TrkC immunostaining in E15 spinal cord. Arrow points to group Ia fibers. Dorsal is up.

Scale bar: 50 μm (A–C), 1 mm (E).

Figure 2

Axonal Projections in the Spinal Cord after DiI Labeling of DRG at P0

(A) Rescued DRG proprioceptive neurons fail to properly innervate motor neurons in double KOs. Instead, some axons are directed towards the ventral midline; they cross the midline and branch.

(B) Schematic drawing of the monosynaptic reflex arc as it normally develops. Small black dots represent NT-3 released centrally by the motor neurons and peripherally by the muscle spindles.

(C) High-power magnification of the inset in (A). Arrow points to the midline, and arrowheads point to synaptic bouton-like structures.

Scale bar: 1 mm (A), 400 μm (C).

Figure 3

Sensory Axons Labeled with DiI through the DRG at E17

(A) DiI-labeled fibers in WT spinal cord. Notice proprioceptive axons extending towards the motor neurons located in the ventral horn of the spinal cord in cross section.

(B) Bax null spinal cord.

(C) NT-3 null spinal cord. Stained fibers are restricted to the nociceptive axons in the dorsal horn, as evidenced by the complete absence of labeling in the ventral spinal cord.

(D) Bax/NT-3 double null spinal cord. Although fibers extend into the ventral spinal cord, they never grow towards the motor neurons, but are directed towards the midline instead.

Scale bar: 100 μm.

Figure 4

Muscle Spindles in Gastrocnemius Muscle and TrkA/TrkC Staining in the Tibial Nerve at P0

(A) NF-M (red) and S46 (green) immunostaining in cross section of gastrocnemius muscle at P0. There are no muscle spindles detected in double KOs.

(B) NF-M (red) and S46 (green) immunostaining in parallel sections of gastrocnemius muscle at P0.

(C) NF-M (red) and S46 (green) immunostaining in parallel sections of gastrocnemius muscle at E17. Double null muscles are mostly devoid of muscle spindles, except for one spindle-like structure detected (shown in inset, denoted by the asterisk).

(D) Muscle spindles detected by DiI labeling through the DRG. Gastrocnemius muscle is sectioned at 40 μm thickness in parallel plane to the muscle fibers.

(E) Muscle spindles detected by TrkC staining in cross section of gastrocnemius muscle at P0.

(F) TrkA (red) and TrkC (green) immunostaining in the tibial nerve cross section at P0. TrkC-positive fibers are missing in NT-3 KOs. Red-green overlap (yellow) is due to the thickness of the section and overlapping of red- and green-labeled (TrkA and TrkC) fibers present at different focal depths, rather than co-localization.

Arrows indicate muscle spindles.

Scale bar: 50 μm (A, B, D), 25 μm (C, E), 75 μm (F).

Figure 5

Chemoattraction of E13 DRG Axons to Local NT-3 Observed by In Vitro Co-Culture Assays

(A) WT DRG with NT-3-loaded bead.

(B) WT DRG with BSA-loaded bead.

(C) Bax null DRG with NT-3-loaded bead.

(D) p75 null DRG with NT-3-loaded bead.

(E) WT DRG with NT-3-loaded bead and TrkC-Fc in the medium.

(F) WT DRG with NT-3 loaded beads placed at increasing distances away from the ganglia (range, 500–1,200 μm).

Scale bar: 150 μm (A–E), 350 μm (F).

Figure 6

Chemoattraction Towards NT-3 Beads Placed in E13 Spinal Cord DRG Explant Co-Cultures

(A) NT-3 bead placed in the midline of E13 WT spinal cord. Notice axons labeled through the DRGs (circled with black dashed lines) growing towards the bead (circled with white dashed lines) enter the spinal cord at ectopic loci instead of dorsal spinal cord.

(B) PBS-loaded bead in E13 spinal cord. All labeled axons extend along the dorsal spinal cord, where they terminate.

(C) High-power image of the bead in (A). Notice labeled axons surrounding the bead.

(D) High-power image of an NT-3-loaded bead. Notice axons bundled around the bead.

(E) High-power image of an NT-3-loaded bead. Notice the axons approaching the bead via the dorsal spinal cord.

(F) High-power image of a PBS-loaded bead. No labeled fibers were observed around control beads.

(G) Summary of our observations from E13 spinal cord DRG organotypic cultures. In control cultures fibers extend along the dorsal spinal cord, where they normally enter the gray matter at E13. In the presence of an ectopic NT-3 source localized at the midline, these axons grow towards the NT-3 bead. NT-3 also initiates axon growth from the DRGs, entering the spinal cord at ectopic lateral loci, growing towards the bead, surrounding the bead, forming nerve bundles, and branching around it.

Scale bar, 175 μm (A and B), 100 μm (C–F).

Footnotes

Conflicts of interest. The authors have declared that no conflicts of interest exist.

Author contributions. BG and RE conceived and designed the experiments. BG, AEM, and PHO performed the experiments. BG, PHO, and RE analyzed the data. BG and RE wrote the paper.

Academic Editor: Joshua R. Sanes, Harvard University

¤Current address: Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School Center for Nervous System Repair, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America

Citation: Genç B, Özdinler PH, Mendoza AE, Erzurumlu RS (2004) A chemoattractant role for NT-3 in proprioceptive axon guidance. PLoS Biol 2(12): e403.Membrane trafficking and mitochondrial abnormalities precede subunit c deposition in a cerebellar cell model of juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis

Abstract

Background

JNCL is a recessively inherited, childhood-onset neurodegenerative disease most-commonly caused by a ~1 kb CLN3 mutation. The resulting loss of battenin activity leads to deposition of mitochondrial ATP synthase, subunit c and a specific loss of CNS neurons. We previously generated Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice, which replicate the common JNCL mutation, express mutant battenin and display JNCL-like pathology.

Results

To elucidate the consequences of the common JNCL mutation in neuronal cells, we used P4 knock-in mouse cerebella to establish conditionally immortalized CbCln3 wild-type, heterozygous, and homozygous neuronal precursor cell lines, which can be differentiated into MAP-2 and NeuN-positive, neuron-like cells. Homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 precursor cells express low levels of mutant battenin and, when aged at confluency, accumulate ATPase subunit c. Recessive phenotypes are also observed at sub-confluent growth; cathepsin D transport and processing are altered, although enzyme activity is not significantly affected, lysosomal size and distribution are altered, and endocytosis is reduced. In addition, mitochondria are abnormally elongated, cellular ATP levels are decreased, and survival following oxidative stress is reduced.

Conclusions

These findings reveal that battenin is required for intracellular membrane trafficking and mitochondrial function. Moreover, these deficiencies are likely to be early events in the JNCL disease process and may particularly impact neuronal survival.

Background

Juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (JNCL), or Batten disease, is a recessively inherited childhood-onset neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive blindness, seizures, motor and cognitive decline, and early death [1]. The primary genetic defect (>80% disease chromosomes) leading to JNCL is a 1.02 kb genomic DNA deletion in the CLN3 gene, which eliminates exons 7 and 8 and surrounding intronic DNA, predicting a non-functional protein product [2].

The pathological hallmark of JNCL is autofluorescent ceroid lipofuscin deposits within autolysosomes that are enriched in subunit c of the mitochondrial ATP synthase complex [3-5]. Remarkably, these deposits are not only found in CNS neurons but are also abundant in non-neuronal cells outside of the nervous system. The relationship of subunit c deposits to the JNCL disease process, and the underlying reason for the neuronal specificity of the disease remain poorly understood.

The CLN3-encoded protein (battenin, also called CLN3 or cln3 p) is a highly conserved, ubiquitously expressed, multi-pass membrane protein [6] that localizes to the lysosome and other vesicular compartments [7-9]. Battenin function remains to be elucidated, although studies of btn1, the yeast CLN3 ortholog, have implicated battenin in lysosomal pH homeostasis and amino acid transport [10,11].

To explore JNCL pathogenesis and battenin function, we previously generated a genetically precise JNCL mouse model. Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice harbor the ~1 kb common JNCL mutation and express a non-truncated mutant battenin isoform that is detectable with antibodies recognizing C-terminal epitopes. Homozygous Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice exhibit a progressive JNCL-like disease, with perinatal onset of subunit c deposition in many cell types and later onset of neuronal dysfunction and behavioral deficits [12]. These findings suggest that the major JNCL defect leads to abnormal turnover of mitochondrial subunit c, in a manner that selectively compromises CNS neurons.

Currently, there is no suitable neuronal cell system to investigate the impact of the common JNCL mutation on biological processes. Therefore, we have established cerebellar neuronal precursor cell lines from Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice. Homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells exhibit pathological hallmarks of the disease, and a survey of membrane organelles revealed membrane trafficking defects and mitochondrial dysfunction in homozygous mutant CbCln3Δex7/8 cells.

Results

Generation of a genetically precise cerebellar JNCL cell model

To generate a precise genetic, neuron-derived JNCL cell culture system, we immortalized granule neurons cultured from postnatal day 4 (P4) cerebella of homozygous and heterozygous Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice, and wild-type littermates. Primary cell cultures enriched for granule neurons were transduced with retroviral vector bearing a selection cassette and temperature-sensitive tsA58 SV40 large T antigen. Growth in G418 containing medium at the permissive temperature (33°C) allowed for selection and isolation of multiple clonal nestin-positive (Fig. 1a), and GFAP-negative (Fig. 1b), cell lines for each genotype. No genotype specific differences were observed in cellular morphology or doubling time (~46 hours) (data not shown). As expected, SV40 large T antigen expression was rapidly lost and cell division ceased when cells were shifted to the non-permissive temperature (39°C) (data not shown). Upon addition of neuronal differentiation cocktail, precursor cells became neuron-like in morphology and exhibited decreased nestin expression (data not shown) and increased MAP2 and NeuN expression (Fig. 1c,1d), but not expression of the Purkinje marker, calbindin (Fig. 1e).

Figure 1

Neuronal marker expression in CbCln3+/+ cells Characterization of CbCln3+/+ cells by immunofluorescence with marker antibodies is shown. CbCln3+/+ precursors exhibit nestin expression (a) but not GFAP expression (b), consistent with a neuronal precursor identity. Upon stimulation with a differentiation cocktail (see Methods), CbCln3+/+ cells achieved neuron-like morphology, with rounded cell bodies and extension of processes, and MAP2 (c) and NeuN (d) expression was increased. CbCln3+/+ cells are negative for the Purkinje neuron marker calbindin (e). CbCln3+/Δex7/8 and CbCln3Δex7/8/Δex7/8 cell lines exhibited identical marker immunofluorescence results. a, b) 20 × magnification; c, d, e) 40 × magnification.

Homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells express mutant battenin and display JNCL-like pathology

Homozygous Cb Cln3Δex7/8 cells were first examined for JNCL-like characteristics. Homozygous Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice express multiple Cln3 mRNA splice variants and mutant battenin protein that is detectable by batp1 antibody recognizing C-terminal epitopes [12]. To assess this molecular phenotype in CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, RT-PCR and anti-battenin (batp1) immunostaining were performed. As shown in Figure 2, Cln3 mRNA isoforms in wild-type and homozygous cells were similar to those observed in total RNA isolated from wild-type or homozygous Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in brain, respectively (Fig. 2). In addition, batp1 immunostaining detected mutant battenin product in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, in a similar albeit reduced cytoplasmic, vesicular staining pattern as that seen in wild-type cells. Batp1 signal exhibited some overlap with the lysosomal marker, Lamp1, but had more significant overlap with early endosome antigen 1 (EEA1) and the late endosomal marker, Rab7 (Fig. 3). Only limited overlap was observed with recycling endosomes, as determined by transferrin receptor co-staining (data not shown). Intriguingly, Lamp1 and EEA1 immunocytochemical distribution were altered in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, with less perinuclear clustering than in wild-type cells, and Rab7 staining was frequently less intense in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells (Fig. 3). Heterozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells contained a mixture of Cln3 mRNA products from both the wild-type allele and the mutant allele, and batp1 signal was similar to that seen in wild-type cells (data not shown).

Figure 2

RT-PCR of Cln3 mRNA in wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells Cln3 Exon1-forward, Exon 15-reverse RT-PCR products are shown, from total wild-type (+/+) or homozygous mutant (Δex7/8/Δex7/8) brain and cell line RNA. Brain and cell line RT-PCR reaction products had identical band patterns on ethidium-bromide stained agarose gels. Wild-type RT-PCR product was a single ~1.6 kb band and mutant products were ~1.6, ~1.5, ~1.4, ~1.35, and ~1.3 kb, representing multiple mutant splice variants.

Figure 3

Battenin and lysosomal and endosomal marker co-staining in wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cerebellar precursor cells Batp1 immunostaining of wild-type (CbCln3+/+) and homozygous mutant (CbCln3Δex7/8/Δex7/8) cerebellar precursor cells is shown, with co-staining for lysosomes (Lamp 1), early endosomes (EEA1), and late endosomes (Rab7). Significant overlap of Batp1 signal (red) with EEA1 (green, middle panels) and Rab7 (green, bottom panels) can be seen as yellow when the two channels are merged (Merge). The degree of Batp1 overlap is greatest with Rab7. Only limited overlap between Batp1 (red) and Lamp 1 (green, top panels) can be seen. Batp1 signal in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells is significantly reduced, but significant overlap with EEA1 and Rab7, and very little Lamp 1 overlap, can be seen as yellow in the respective merged panels. Notably, Lamp 1 and EEA1 localization appear altered, and Rab7 staining was frequently less intense in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells. Wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 confocal images were captured with identical exposure settings. 60 × magnification.

During sub-confluent growth conditions, neither wild-type nor homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells displayed autofluorescence or subunit c inclusion formation (data not shown). However, when cells were aged at confluency (3+ days post-confluency), homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cellular subunit c levels were elevated beyond normal wild-type levels by immunostaining (Fig. 4a) and immunoblot analysis (Fig. 4b). Autofluorescent signal sometimes overlapped with subunit c signal, but also was elevated more diffusely (Fig. 4a). Moreover, although multilamellar "fingerprint" profiles were not detected, confluency-aged homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells displayed numerous ultrastructural abnormalities including electron dense inclusions characteristic of lipofuscin and large autophagosomes that contained dense core structures, degenerating mitochondria, and many smaller vesicles (Fig. 4c). Inclusion bodies and autophagosomes were infrequently observed in confluency-aged wild-type cultures (data not shown).

Figure 4

Subunit c accumulation in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cerebellar precursor cells a. Subunit c immunostaining and autofluorescence of 7-day confluency-aged wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells is shown. Wild-type cultures (CbCln3+/+) exhibited limited subunit c immunostaining and autofluorescence. However, CbCln3Δex7/8/Δex7/8 cells contained numerous subunit c puncta. Autofluorescence (7 days AF) was also significantly elevated (right panels), although limited overlap with subunit c puncta was observed (arrows). 40 × magnification. b. Immunoblot analysis of subunit c protein at sub-confluency or 7-day confluency incubation is shown. Total protein extracts from sub-confluency wild-type (+/+) and homozygous mutant (Δex7/8/Δex7/8) cultures contained approximately equal levels of subunit c protein (α-sub c). 7-day confluency extract from homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells (Δex7/8/Δex7/8) had elevated levels of subunit c protein (~1.5X), relative to wild-type extract (+/+). Protein levels were normalized to cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV (α-cox4). c. TEM analysis of inclusions in 7-day confluency-aged homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells is shown. A large autophagosome contained by double membrane (arrows) is filled with degenerating mitochondria (Md), electron dense cores (left and right of *) and other smaller vesicular structures. A large electron-dense inclusion, with a lipofuscin (Ln) appearance, is also present. M, mitochondria. 10,000 × magnification.

Homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells and Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice process cathepsin D abnormally

We next investigated the basis for subunit c accumulation, testing the hypothesis that cathepsin D is abnormal since it is required for ATP synthase subunit c degradation in the lysosome [13]. We first tested cathepsin D transport and processing in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells and Cln3Δex7/8 mice using anti-cathepsin D antibody that recognizes unprocessed and processed cathepsin D isoforms. Immunostaining of wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells revealed a perinuclear and punctate vesicular cathepsin D distribution, consistent with its transport and processing through the secretory pathway and delivery to the lysosome (Fig. 5a). However, in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, cathepsin D distribution was less vesicular and more perinuclear-clustered than in wild-type cells. Immunoblots of homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cell and Cln3Δex7/8 tissue extracts also showed altered relative levels of cathepsin D isoforms (Fig. 5b). Cathepsin D isoforms, identified by relative molecular weights, represent the ~45 kDa precursor, the ~43 kDa intermediate single chain form of the enzyme, and the 31 kDa heavy chain of the double-chain form of the mature enzyme [14]. In homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cell and Cln3Δex7/8 tissue extracts, the precursor and heavy chains were reduced, and the single chain was slightly elevated compared to wild-type extracts. The cellular growth media did not contain altered levels of cathepsin D, indicating enzyme secretion was not affected. Heterozygous Cln3Δex7/8 mice and CbCln3Δex7/8 cells were indistinguishable from wild-type, as expected for a recessive disease phenotype (data not shown).

Figure 5

Cathepsin D localization and processing in wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells a. Immunostaining of wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 precursor cells with anti-cathepsin D antibody, recognizing unprocessed and processed forms of cathepsin D protein is shown. CbCln3+/+ cells (left panel) exhibited a perinuclear and cytoplasmic punctate signal. Cathepsin D signal in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells (right panel) was more often perinuclear, with less cytoplasmic punctate signal, compared to wild-type CbCln3+/+ cells. 40 × magnification. b. α-Cathepsin D-probed immunoblots of total wild-type versus homozygous Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in tissue or CbCln3Δex7/8 cellular extracts are shown. The ~45 kDa cathepsin D band, representing precursor, was the predominant band in wild-type (wt) tissue and cellular extracts, with lower levels of mature enzyme (single chain, ~43 kDa, and heavy chain, ~31 kDa). Conversely, homozygous Cln3Δex7/8 and CbCln3Δex7/8 mutant (m) extracts exhibited reduced levels of precursor and heavy chain of the double-chain form of the enzyme, with elevated levels of single-chain mature enzyme.

The impact of the altered cathepsin D processing on enzymatic activity was next tested to determine if altered enzymatic activity accounts for inefficient subunit c turnover. In a fluorogenic in vitro assay, cathepsin D activity in total cellular extracts was not significantly altered in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells (376 ± 89 RFU/μg total protein), versus wild-type cells (324 ± 58 RFU/μg total protein), although a consistent trend towards increased enzymatic activity in mutant cells was observed. Thus, cathepsin D transport and processing are disrupted in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells in a manner such that enzymatic activity appears to be relatively unaffected.

Homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells show abnormal membrane organelles

The abnormal transport and processing of cathepsin D suggested membrane trafficking disruptions in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells; therefore, we surveyed the subcellular distribution and morphology of membrane organelles. Components of the secretory pathway, including the ER, cis-Golgi, and trans-Golgi, did not appear altered from wild-type appearance when labeled with the respective markers, protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), GM130, and VVL (data not shown). By contrast, the lysosomal markers, Lysotracker and Lamp 2 had significantly altered signal in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, versus wild-type cells. Wild-type cells exhibited brightly stained lysosomes that were large and clustered in the perinuclear region whereas homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 lysosomes were lightly stained, smaller vesicles that were more diffusely scattered in the cytoplasm of the cell (Fig. 6). Lamp 1 distribution was also altered, as previously noted (Fig. 3). However, Lamp 1 and Lamp 2 total protein levels were similar in wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells by immunoblot analysis, indicating the altered signal likely reflects dispersed lysosomes or altered localization and/or epitope availability (data not shown). It is noteworthy that Lysotracker dye, which selectively accumulates in acidic compartments, exhibited the most marked reduction in lysosomal labeling. This observation may reflect altered lysosomal pH, an established finding in JNCL [10,15].

Figure 6

Lysotracker and Lamp 2 labeling of wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 lysosomes Lysosomal labeling of wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 precursor cells with lysotracker and Lamp 2 antibody is shown. Lysotracker dye (top panels) labeled large, perinuclear-clustered lysosomes and scattered lysosomes in the periphery of wild-type cells (CbCln3+/+). Lysotracker stain was dramatically reduced in homozygous mutant cells (CbCln3Δex7/8/Δex7/8), with smaller labeled vesicles and less apparent perinuclear clustering. Lamp 2 (bottom panels) immunostaining also showed reduced signal intensity with less perinuclear clustering in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, although the effect was somewhat less dramatic than that observed with Lysotracker dye. Wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 confocal images were captured with identical exposure settings. 60 × magnification.

Consistent with the altered early endosome marker (EEA1) signal observed by immunostaining (Fig. 3), fluid-phase endocytosis was also altered in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, as measured by dextran-FITC uptake (Fig. 7). Following a 15-minute incubation in media containing dextran-FITC, wild-type and heterozygote cells displayed brightly stained, large endocytic vesicles that were clustered in the perinuclear region. However, homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells were less brightly stained with most dextran-FITC signal localizing to smaller vesicles scattered throughout the cytoplasm of the cell.

Figure 7

Endocytosis in wild-type, heterozygous and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells Dextran-FITC uptake in wild-type, heterozygous and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 precursor cells is shown. In wild-type (CbCln3+/+, left panel) and heterozygous (CbCln3+/Δex7/8, middle panel) cells, dextran-FITC label was observed in a perinuclear-clustered vesicular pattern with scattered labeled vesicles also present in the periphery. In contrast, dextran-FITC label of homozygous mutant (CbCln3Δex7/8/Δex7/8, right panel) cells was reduced overall and exhibited smaller stained vesicles with less perinuclear clustering. Confocal images were captured with identical exposure settings. 40 × magnification.

Finally, because subunit c is a mitochondrial protein and its turnover proceeds through autophagic engulfment of mitochondria [13], we analyzed homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cell mitochondrial morphology and function. Mitochondrial distribution in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells was indistinguishable from wild-type and heterozygous cells; however, homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 mitochondria appeared more elongated by grp75 marker immunostaining and TEM analysis (Fig. 8a). 72% of homozygous mutant mitochondria were greater than 0.6 μm in length (range = 0.26 μm to 2.75 μm), while fewer wild-type mitochondria (51%) reached this length (range = 0.15 μm to 2.29 μm). Mitochondrial width was not altered in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells (data not shown). Moreover, compared to wild-type or heterozygous cells, homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells had significantly reduced cellular ATP levels (1.3 fold less, Fig. 8b) and exhibited reduced survival following hydrogen peroxide treatment (~50% of wild-type survival, Fig. 8c), suggesting impaired energy metabolism and oxidative stress response. Taken together, these data support impaired mitochondrial function in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells.

Figure 8

Mitochondrial morphology and function in wild-type, heterozygous and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells a. Confocal and TEM micrographs of wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 mitochondrial morphology are shown. Immunostaining with the inner mitochondrial membrane marker, grp75 (top panels) highlighted elongated mitochondria in homozygous mutant cells (CbCln3Δex7/8/Δex7/8), relative to wild-type mitochondria (CbCln3+/+) (insets, zoom = 2.75x). Mitochondrial distribution was not altered from the wild-type pattern. Elongated homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 mitochondria were also observed by TEM analysis. 60 × magnification. b. Cellular ATP levels in wild-type, heterozygous and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 precursor cells are shown. Wild-type (open bar) and heterozygous (gray bar) CbCln3Δex7/8 cells contained ~39 μM ATP, while homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells (black bar) contained ~1.3 fold reduced levels of ATP (~30 μM), which was statistically significant in a t-test (p < 0.0001). Wild-type and heterozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cellular ATP levels were not statistically different from each other (p > 0.4). A representative of triplicate experiments is shown (n = 6 in each experiment). c. Cell survival following 24-hour hydrogen peroxide treatment is shown. Homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells were ~2-fold more sensitive to oxidative stress by hydrogen peroxide treatment. Wild-type (circle) and heterozygous (triangle) CbCln3Δex7/8 cells exhibited ~50% survival rates with 75–100 μM H2O2, whereas homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells (squares) had a ~50% survival rate with 50 μM H2O2. A representative of triplicate experiments is shown (n = 4 in each experiment).

Discussion

CbCln3Δex7/8 cerebellar precursor cells represent the first genetically accurate neuron-derived culture model of JNCL. Homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells express mutant battenin and JNCL-hallmark mitochondrial ATPase subunit c accumulation, upon aging of cells at confluency. Moreover, this is the first study to indicate recessive endosomal/lysosomal membrane trafficking defects and mitochondrial dysfunction that precedes subunit c deposition in an accurate JNCL model. Importantly, these defects are likely to be early events in the JNCL disease process and may particularly impact neuronal function.

Abnormal cathepsin D localization and processing in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells and Cln3Δex7/8 mice likely reflects altered vesicular trafficking and/or lysosomal pH, which is known to impact cathepsin D processing [14,16]. Indeed, CLN3 overexpression in HEK-293 cells altered lysosomal pH and cathepsin D processing [17], and lysosomal pH homeostasis is disrupted in JNCL [10,15]. It is noteworthy that cathepsin B and the CLN2-encoded enzyme, TPPI, are also altered in JNCL [18-20]. Nevertheless, despite the cathepsin D protein alterations that are observed in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, cathepsin D enzymatic activity does not appear to be reduced. Thus, decreased cathepsin D activity is unlikely to account for subunit c accumulation in JNCL.

Aging of homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells at confluency is necessary to induce significantly accumulated subunit c protein. However, membrane organelle disruptions precede subunit c accumulation in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, since they are observed without aging at confluency. Lysosomal and endosomal size and distribution are altered, and mitochondria are abnormally elongated and functionally compromised in sub-confluent homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cultures. These observations argue that membrane trafficking defects do not result from excessive subunit c accumulation compromising the lysosome, but rather are early events in the disease process preceding subunit c accumulation. Mitochondrial abnormalities, which have also been reported in JNCL patients and other animal models [21-23], may result from ineffective turnover by autophagy, a lysosomal-targeted pathway [24]. Alternatively, or simultaneously, battenin deficiency may impact mitochondrial function upstream of turnover, affecting mitochondrial biogenesis and/or altered transport and processing of mitochondrial proteins.

In wild-type CbCln3 neuronal precursor cells battenin primarily co-localizes with early and late endosomes. Battenin immunostaining in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 neuronal precursors is significantly reduced in abundance, but mutant signal also co-localizes with endosomal markers suggesting mutant battenin protein with C-terminal epitopes is trafficked similar to wild-type protein. In other studies, CLN3/battenin protein localization has been reported to partially overlap with late endosomes and lysosomes in non-neuronal cells [7], and to lysosomes, synaptosomes [8] and endosomes [9,25] in neurons. These data jointly indicate that battenin resides in a subset of vesicular compartments linking multiple membrane trafficking pathways, perhaps functioning in vesicular transport and/or fusion. Endocytic and lysosomal-targeted pathways, including mitochondrial autophagy, are specifically implicated in this study.

Conclusions

The membrane trafficking and mitochondrial deficits uncovered in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells are likely to particularly impact neuronal function. Neurotransmission heavily relies on membrane vesicle transport, and a high-energy metabolism may further sensitize neurons to the loss of battenin activity. Thus, our panel of wild-type, heterozygous, and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cerebellar cells provide an ideal model system to further elucidate battenin function and JNCL pathogenesis.

Methods

Antibody and cell staining reagents

Nestin (clone Rat 401, 2 μg/ml), Lamp 1 (clone 1D4B, 6 μg/ml), and Lamp 2 (clone Abl-93; 6 μg/ml) monoclonal antibodies were obtained from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, maintained by The University of Iowa, Department of Biological Sciences. Batp1 (1 μg/ml) was previously described [12]. Anti-subunit c antibody (0.7 μg/ml) was kindly provided by Dr. Kominami (Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan). Additional antibodies were as follows: GFAP, 1:2000 (DAKO Corporation); calbindin, 1:5000 (Sigma); NeuN, 10 μg/ml (Chemicon); SV40 T antigen (Pab 101), 2 μg/ml (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); cathepsin D (C-20), 2 μg/ml (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV (cox4), 1:1000 (BD Biosciences Clontech); PDI (H-160), 2 μg/ml (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); GM130, 1 μg/ml (BD Transduction Labs); α-tubulin, 1:15,000 (Sigma); grp75, 1:200 (Stressgen); early endosome antigen-1 (EEA1), 2 μg/ml (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); rab 7, 4 μg/ml (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). All fluorescent secondary antibodies were obtained from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories and HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were obtained from Amersham Biosciences. Additional cell markers were as follows: VVL-biotin, 1:2000 (Vector Laboratories), 10,000 MW dextran-FITC, 1 mg/ml and Lysotracker Red DND-99, 500 nM (Molecular Probes).

Generation, maintenance and differentiation of CbCln3 cerebellar neuronal precursor lines

Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice have been previously described [12]. Littermate pups from heterozygote crosses were used for primary culture establishment, by previously described methods that yield cerebellar granule neuron-enriched cultures [26]. Postnatal day 4 (P4) cerebella were dissected in Hank's Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS, Sigma), supplemented with 35 mM glucose. Tail biopsies were also collected for genomic DNA isolation and genotypic analysis. Trypsin/EDTA (10 mg/ml, Sigma) and DNase I (100 μg/ml, Sigma), suspended in HBSS, helped dissociate cerebella for primary culture plating onto 0.01% poly-ornithine (Sigma) coated 100 mm dishes. Primary cultures from individual cerebella were cultured overnight at 37°C, 5% CO2, in granule neuron growth media (Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium [DMEM, Gibco BRL #11995-065], 10% fetal bovine serum [Sigma #F-2442], supplemented with 24 mM KCl). Infection was performed the following day with defective retrovirus transducing the temperature-sensitive tsA58/U19 large T antigen and a selection neomycin-resistance cassette [27], as previously described [28]. Following infection, cultures were shifted to the tsA58/U19 permissive growth temperature of 33°C and selection was in the same growth media as above, with 200 μg/ml G418. Conditionally immortalized colonies were isolated 3–9 weeks post-infection and expanded for frozen stocks and further sub-clone isolation. Multiple clonal lines were obtained for each genotype and all phenotypes were confirmed in at least 2 independent CbCln3 cell lines. CbCln3 cell lines were maintained on 0.01% poly-ornithine coated dishes at 30–90% confluency, in 33°C and 5% CO2 atmosphere. Passage number was recorded (up to ~20 passages), but had no apparent impact on phenotype. Neuronal differentiation was as previously described [29] with the following cocktail: 10 ng/ml α-FGF, 250 μM IBMX, 200 nM TPA, 50 μM forskolin, 5 μM dopamine (Sigma).

Genotyping and RT-PCR

Genomic DNA was extracted from tail biopsies and cell pellets as described (Cotman et al., 2002). Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in allele PCR genotyping was with wild-type primers, WtF (5'-CAGCATCTCCTCAGGGCTA-3') and WtR (5'-CCAACATAGAAAGTAGGGTGTGC-3') to yield a ~250 bp band and knock-in primers, 552F (5'-GAGCTTTGTTCTGGTTGCCTTC-3') and Ex9RA (5'-GCAGTCTCTGCCTCGTTTTCT-3') to yield a ~500 bp band. PCR cycling conditions were 95°C for 30 seconds, 58°C for 30 seconds, and 72°C for 35 seconds, repeated for 34 cycles. Total RNA isolation and Cln3 RT-PCR primers and procedures have been previously described [12].

Subunit c accumulation assay

Cells were seeded into 4-well chamber-slides (Falcon) at a density of 5 × 104 cells per well for microscopy studies, or into 100 mm dishes (Falcon) at a density of 5 × 105 cells per dish for protein extraction. Cells were typically >95% confluent one day post-plating, and the following day was considered 1-day post-confluency. At the indicated times, cells were either fixed with 4% formaldehyde in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.4, for 20 minutes and processed for autofluorescence/subunit c immunostaining, or cell pellets were collected for total protein extraction.

Alternatively, cells were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde/2% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4 for 1 hour and subsequently post-fixed and processed for TEM analysis as described [12]. In confocal microscopy studies, autofluorescent signal was observed over multiple wavelengths. For co-staining, settings were reduced such that autofluorescent signal did not contribute to antibody label signal.

Immunostaining and Immunoblot analysis

For immunostaining, cells were seeded at a density of 3–5 × 104 cells per well in 4-well chamber-slides and grown overnight at 33°C, unless indicated otherwise. Fixation was with ice-cold 4% formaldehyde in PBS, pH 7.4, for 20 minutes, or with ice-cold methanol/acetone (1:1) for 10 minutes at -20°C followed by air-drying (antibody-dependent). Cells were washed with PBS at least 2 times, 5 minutes per wash, between each of the following steps of the staining procedure: 0.1 M glycine in PBS for 5 minutes, 0.05% or 0.1% (antibody-dependent) Triton X-100 (Fisher Scientific) in PBS for 5 minutes, 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS for 30 minutes, primary antibody diluted in 2% BSA/PBS for 90 minutes, secondary antibody diluted in 2% BSA/PBS for 60 minutes. All incubations were carried out at room temperature. Following staining procedures, slides were coverslipped with Vectashield mounting medium (Vector Laboratories) and analyzed on a BioRad Radiance 2100 confocal microscope (Biorad), with identical exposure settings for wild-type and mutant like images. All comparisons of wild-type and mutant staining were performed in Adobe Photoshop with identical brightness and contrast adjustments.

Total proteins were isolated from cell pellets by extraction with ice-cold 20 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 1% Triton X-100 (membrane-research grade, Roche), plus protease inhibitors (Complete mini tablet, 0.7 μg/ml pepstatin A, 2 μg/ml aprotinin, 5 μg/ml leupeptin [Roche]). Following homogenization through a 25-gauge needle (~10 passes), extracts were centrifuged at 1000 × g for 10 minutes, at 4°C, to remove debris. Typically, 20–40 μg of protein (determined by Bio-rad Dc Protein Assay) was separated by SDS-PAGE, for subsequent immunoblotting, as described [12]. 16.5% tris-tricine SDS-PAGE gels were used for subunit c immunoblotting experiments.

Cathepsin D activity assay

100 mm tissue culture dishes, which were approximately 80–90% confluent, were washed briefly with ice-cold PBS, and total protein extracts were isolated by scraping cells into 10 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 0.1% Triton X-100 followed by incubation on ice, for 20 minutes. The insoluble material was centrifuged at 14,000 g, the supernatant was isolated, and protein concentration was determined using the Bio-rad Dc Protein Assay. 50–70 μg of total protein extract were used to measure cathepsin D activity using the Fluorogenic Innozyme™ Cathepsin D Immunocapture Activity Assay Kit (EMD Biosciences) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Relative fluorescence was measured using an Analyst AD plate reader (Molecular Devices) with the following filters and settings: excitation filter, 360-35; emission filter, 400-20, Flash lamp with 100 readings/well, 100 ms between readings, and 100,000 μs integration time.

Lysosomal staining and endocytic uptake

Cells were seeded at a density of 3–5 × 104 cells per well in 4-well chamber-slides and grown overnight at 33°C. Growth media was exchanged for fresh, pre-warmed growth media containing 500 nM Lysotracker or 1 mg/ml dextran-FITC, and cells were incubated at 33°C for 45 minutes or 15 minutes, respectively. Following labeling, cells were immediately placed on ice and washed for 10 minutes in ice-cold dye-free media, and fixed with 4% formaldehyde in PBS, for 20 minutes on ice. Chambers were removed and slides were coverslipped with Vectashield mounting media for confocal microscopy analysis, as described above.

Morphometric analysis of mitochondria

TEM photomicrographs (10,000 × – 40,000 × magnification) were taken from random grid fields. For length measurements, the longest side of each mitochondria was measured in centimeters, and along the length of the mitochondria, width measurements were taken every 2.5–4 mm (dependent on the magnification of the micrograph image). Following measurement, all numbers were normalized to reflect one magnification and data was analyzed using Microsoft Excel software. To ascertain unmagnified mitochondrial size, final measurement data, in centimeters, was converted to nanometers according to scale bar representation.

ATP measurement

ATP was measured by using the CellTiter-GLO® Luminescent Cell Viability kit (Promega), according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Briefly, cells were plated in a black opaque-walled 96 well plate (Packard Bioscience) at a density of 20000/well and incubated at 33°C overnight. The following day, CellTiter-GLO® Reagent was added to each well and cell lysis was induced by mixing 2 minutes. An ATP standard curve was prepared in the same plate. Before recording luminescence with a microplate luminometer (MicroLumat Plus LB 96V, Berthold Techonologies), the plate was dark adapted for 10 minutes at room temperature to stabilize the luminescence signal.

Hydrogen peroxide treatment assay

Cells were plated at a density of 10,000 cells/well in 96-well plates and incubated at 33°C overnight. The following day, fresh media containing varying concentrations of hydrogen peroxide was dispersed to each well. Cells were incubated in the presence of hydrogen peroxide for 24 hours, at 33°C, and viability was measured using the CellTiter-96® AQueous Non-Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assay (Promega), according to the manufacturer's specifications.

Authors' contributions

EF participated in establishment and characterization of cell lines and performed ATP determinations. PW participated in mitochondrial analysis and immunocytochemistry. JE, TL-N, AMT, and HG participated in genotypic and additional phenotypic analysis of cell lines. DR and EC generated virus-conditioned medium for conditional immortalization of cells. MEM co-conceived of the study and assisted on drafting of the manuscript. SLC co-conceived of the study, participated in establishment and phenotypic analysis of cell lines, and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank Dr. E. Kominami for antibody to subunit c of mitochondrial ATPase, L. Trakimas and M. Ericsson of the Harvard Medical School Electron Microscope Facility, Dr. David Sulzer for assistance with TEM analysis, Dr. Sylvie Breton for assistance with endocytosis experiments, and Dr. Andre Bernards and James Follen for assistance with the cathepsin D activity assay. This work was supported by NIH/NINDS grant # NS 33648. Dr. S.L. Cotman received fellowship funding from the Batten Disease Support and Research Association (BDSRA).A Signaling Pathway Involving TGF-β2 and Snail in Hair Follicle Morphogenesis

Abstract

In a common theme of organogenesis, certain cells within a multipotent epithelial sheet exchange signals with their neighbors and develop into a bud structure. Using hair bud morphogenesis as a paradigm, we employed mutant mouse models and cultured keratinocytes to dissect the contributions of multiple extracellular cues in orchestrating adhesion dynamics and proliferation to shape the cluster of cells involved. We found that transforming growth factor β2 signaling is necessary to transiently induce the transcription factor Snail and activate the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in the bud. In the epidermis, Snail misexpression leads to hyperproliferation and a reduction in intercellular adhesion. When E-cadherin is transcriptionally down-regulated, associated adhesion proteins with dual functions in signaling are released from cell-cell contacts, a process which we demonstrate leads to Ras-MAPK activation. These studies provide insights into how multipotent cells within a sheet are stimulated to undergo transcriptional changes that result in proliferation, junctional remodeling, and bud formation. This novel signaling pathway further weaves together the web of different morphogens and downstream transcriptional events that guide hair bud formation within the developing skin.

Introduction

Mammalian development involves the morphogenesis of complex three-dimensional structures from seemingly uniform sheets or masses of cells. A simple bud-like structure initiates the formation of many organs, including lungs, spinal cord, mammary glands, and hair follicles [1]. The multipotent, adhering epithelial cells are typically attached to an underlying basal lamina that polarizes the epithelial sheet and separates it from surrounding mesenchyme. Budding morphogenesis is guided by a reciprocal exchange of signals between epithelium and mesenchyme to specify the identity of the organ that will form and to govern its growth.

At the helm of these molecular communication pathways are Wnts, bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs), transforming growth factor βs (TGF-βs), and fibroblast growth factors (FGFs). Through activation of cell surface transmembrane receptors, these external signaling molecules trigger distinct cascades of intracellular events that culminate in changes in gene expression, growth, and differentiation [2]. How this constellation of signals collaborates in tailoring each budding process so that it executes a distinct morphogenetic program has yet to be comprehensively defined. However, the process appears to be patterned at the initial stages of bud formation, since the relative importance of these pathways and their downstream effectors differ as buds begin to develop and cell fates are specified.

The development of a bud requires a number of coordinated changes in the behavior of the targeted cells within an epithelial sheet. The process must be accompanied by alterations in the proliferation, polarity, shape, and adhesiveness of selected cells, as well as by modifications in their underlying basal lamina. Thus, extracellular epithelial-mesenchymal crosstalk must be intricately orchestrated to couple the determination of distinct cell fates with the contemporaneous remodeling of the physical and structural properties of the cell.

Among the few dispensable organs, hair follicles offer an excellent model system to study epithelial bud formation. Mammalian skin epithelium begins as a single sheet of multipotent ectodermal cells. During development, specialized mesenchymal cells populate the skin in a spatially defined pattern to initiate the complex epithelial-mesenchymal crosstalk that will specify the bud [3]. Once committed, a small cluster of epithelial cells, the placode, instructs a group of underlying mesenchymal cells to condense and form the nascent dermal papilla, which will be a permanent fixture of the hair follicle. Subsequent exchanges between the placode and nascent dermal papilla result in further growth of the follicle into the underlying dermis, or down-growth, and eventual differentiation into the six concentric layers of the mature follicle.

Previously, we delineated how two respective epithelial and mesenchymal signals, Wnts and the BMP-inhibitory factor noggin, function in concert to induce lymphoid enhancer factor-1/β-catenin (LEF-1/β-catenin)-mediated gene transcription within the follicle placode [4]. The downstream changes elicited through convergence of these two early signaling pathways include down-regulation of the gene encoding E-cadherin, the prototypical epithelial cadherin that forms the transmembrane core of intercellular adherens junctions (AJs) [5]. We subsequently showed that when E-cadherin is transgenically elevated in mouse skin, hair follicle morphogenesis is blocked, suggesting that E-cadherin down-regulation is a critical event in governing the adhesion dynamics necessary for budding morphogenesis [4]. Like LEF-1, E-cadherin also binds to β-catenin. At sites of cell-cell contact, however, E-cadherin-β-catenin complexes recruit α-catenin, which in turn coordinates the associated actin polymerization dynamics necessary to stabilize nascent AJs and integrate the cytoskeleton across an epithelial sheet [6,7,8]. α-Catenin also binds to the class III Lin-1, Isl-1, Mec-3 (LIM) protein Ajuba (a member of the zyxin family of proteins), which appears to function dually in both adhesion and in activation of the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway [9,10]. Through these links, AJs appear able to couple adhesion with cytoskeletal dynamics as well as with nuclear and cytoplasmic signaling. This provides a framework for conceptualizing why E-cadherin levels appear to impact upon a plethora of developmental processes (reviewed in [11]).

As we probed more deeply into the underlying mechanisms governing E-cadherin promoter activity, we were intrigued by the close proximity of the LEF-1/β-catenin binding site to a site known to bind the Snail/Slug family of zinc finger transcriptional repressor proteins [12,13,14,15]. Both activity of Snail and down-regulation of E-cadherin play pivotal roles in epithelial to mesenchymal transitions (EMTs), typified by the transformation of polarized, adhering epithelial cells into motile mesenchymal cells [16,17]. Bud formation differs from an EMT in that E-cadherin activity needs to be down-regulated but not prevented, so that adhesive junctions are remodeled rather than quantitatively impaired. Supportive of an underlying ability to fine-tune cadherin expression at the transcriptional level, Snail seems to have an additive effect with LEF-1/β-catenin in negatively modulating E-cadherin promoter activity [4].

In the present study, we discovered that Snail is expressed briefly at an early stage of hair bud formation, when E-cadherin down-regulation and activation of proliferation take place. Thereafter, Snail disappears and remains absent during subsequent follicle down-growth and maturation. This exquisite pattern appears to be functionally relevant since altering it in vivo correspondingly affects features associated with hair bud formation, including down-regulation of E-cadherin, increased proliferation, and repressed terminal differentiation. Although the temporal spike of Snail in the hair bud is reflected at the mRNA level and seems to follow Wnt signaling and BMP inhibition, LEF-1/β-catenin activation does not appear to induce Snail gene expression in embryonic skin keratinocytes. In contrast, we provide in vitro, transgenic (Tg), and gene targeting evidence to show that TGF-β2 and small phenotype– and mothers against decapentaplegic–related protein 2 (SMAD2) signaling are upstream inducers of Snail gene expression in skin epithelium. In the absence of TGF-β2 signaling and Snail gene expression, hair placodes can form, but further follicle down-growth is blocked. Our studies point to the view that Snail likely functions downstream of cell fate specification, at a stage where the bud begins to exhibit enhanced proliferation and migration.

Results

Snail mRNA and Protein Are Expressed Transiently at the Hair Bud Stage of Follicle Morphogenesis

Although Snail family members are most frequently associated with EMTs, they also participate in many malignant processes involving a down-regulation but not a quantitative abrogation of intercellular junctions [18]. The range of developmental processes in which Snail family members have been implicated thus includes the type of epithelial remodeling that is observed in hair follicle bud formation. Given our prior observation that exogenously added Snail can participate with LEF-1/β-catenin in down-regulating E-cadherin expression in keratinocytes [4], coupled with the established requirement for LEF-1/β-catenin in hair follicle morphogenesis [4,19], we turned to addressing whether Snail/Slug family members might also participate in the process.

PCR analyses identified transient Snail mRNA expression during a period of skin embryogenesis when waves of hair follicles are forming (unpublished data).To pinpoint specifically where Snail mRNA is expressed in the developing skin, we conducted in situ hybridization using a cRNA probe unique to the Snail 3′ untranslated region (UTR). Embryonic day 17.5 (E17.5) was chosen, since the multiple waves of follicle morphogenesis occurring at this time enabled us to evaluate Snail expression at different stages of the process. As shown in Figure 1A, specific hybridization was detected within the epithelium of nascent hair buds. By contrast, as follicles progressed further through their development (e.g., germ and peg stages), they exhibited no signs of hybridization (Figure 1A). The transient nature of Snail mRNA expression during follicle development was most apparent in hybridized skin sections containing follicles from two different waves of morphogenesis (as shown in Figure 1). Hybridizing hair buds from a later wave appeared juxtaposed with nonhybridizing follicles from an earlier wave.

To determine whether this transient nature of Snail mRNA expression is reflected at the protein level, we generated an antibody against the N-terminal sequence that resides upstream of the more conserved zinc finger domains. As judged by Western blot analysis, the antibody did not detect endogenous proteins from cultured keratinocytes, but it did yield a band of the expected size from keratinocytes transiently expressing a hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged Snail protein (Figure 1B). The antibody also recognized a band corresponding to the size of endogenous Snail (approximately 28 kDa) in lysates from embryonic mouse skin, the temporal appearance of which corresponded to the waves of hair follicle morphogenesis from E15.5 to newborn when over 90% of the hair on the mouse is formed (Figure 1B). Consistent with the Western blot data, immunohistochemical analysis did not detect Snail in single-layered E13.5 epidermis (Figure 1C) nor in the placode, which is the earliest morphological sign of the commitment of multipotent cells of the embryonic ectoderm to a hair cell fate (Figure 1D). Consistent with the in situ hybridization results, anti-Snail antibody labeled only hair buds and not follicles at more mature stages of development (Figure 1E). Taken together, the anti-Snail antibody appeared to be specific for its target protein. It did not detect other Snail family members known to be expressed in keratinocytes and/or skin (unpublished data). Furthermore, the immunohistochemical data paralleled our Snail in situ hybridization data revealing transient Snail expression at the hair bud stage (Figure 1A).

As judged by immunohistochemistry, Snail protein was localized to the nuclei of the hair bud cells (Figure 1E). This feature was consistent with Snail's known function as a transcriptional repressor [12,13]. Additionally, anti-Snail labeling was detected in only three of the four major waves of follicle morphogenesis. Snail was not found in the buds of guard hairs that are the earliest of all hairs to form (at E13.5), and which constitute less than 5% of the mouse coat (unpublished data).

As judged by immunofluorescence with antibodies against the proliferating nuclear antigen Ki67, the timing of Snail expression coincided with the stage at which the developing follicle enhanced its proliferation and down-growth (Figure 1F). Immunohistochemistry with antibodies against the active (phosphorylated) form of MAPK (pMAPK) marked a subset of the proliferating (Ki67-positive) cells, and pMAPK-positive cells were enriched in the hair bud (Figure 1G). The timing of Snail induction and Ki67 and pMAPK enrichment in the hair bud appeared to follow closely the induction of LEF-1/β-catenin activity, known to initiate in the hair placode stage [20]. However, like placodes, hair buds exhibited down-regulation in E-cadherin expression (Figure 1H; see also [4]).

Sustained Expression of Snail Results in Epidermal Hyperproliferation and Differentiation Defects in Tg Mouse Skin

The striking spike of Snail expression coincident with hair bud formation and enhanced proliferation prompted us to examine the consequences of ectopically expressing Snail elsewhere in mouse skin epidermis. To distinguish Tg from endogenous Snail, we used the HA-epitope, shown previously not to alter Snail's transcriptional activity [12]. Of 20 K14-Snail[HA] Tg animals generated, three expressed the transgene and all exhibited analogous phenotypes. Mice that integrated the transgene at the single-cell stage died at or shortly after birth. The three surviving full-Tg founder mice harbored transgene integrations that gave stable transmission of mosaic Snail gene expression through the germline. Progressively poor health necessitated our sacrificing most offspring from these lines within a year of birth.

As Snail Tg animals grew, they became distinguished by their small size, short tails, and flaky skin (Figure 2A). Histological analyses of 3-d old (P3) mice revealed mosaic patches marked by epidermal thickening (Figure 2B). The mosaic morphology was reflected at the level of Tg Snail protein, with only the hyperthickened regions expressing nuclear HA-tagged Snail (Figure 2C). These hyperthickened areas were marked by excessive proliferation, as revealed by antibodies against the proliferating nuclear antigen Ki67 (Figure 2D and 2E). Activated, pMAPK-positive cells were also prevalent in these areas (Figure 2F and 2G), as were cells expressing keratin 6, a keratin induced in the suprabasal layers of hyperproliferative skin (Figure 2H and 2I).

Expression of the Snail transgene did not block terminal differentiation in the hyperproliferative epidermis, but it distorted it markedly (Figure 3A–3H). Typical of most hyperproliferating conditions, Snail expression led to a large expansion in layers with spinous and granular morphology. Additionally, however, was a marked and variable expansion of keratin 5 (K5), normally restricted to the innermost basal layer (see Figure 3). Although the failure of Snail-null mice to develop past gastrulation [21] precluded our ability to study the loss of Snail function in skin development, a good correlation emerged between the expression of Snail protein and the extension of K5, Ki67, and pMAPK suprabasally (compare data in Figures 2 and 3).

The changes in hyperproliferation and differentiation were not initially accompanied by gross signs of epithelial invaginations. With age, however, epidermal folds and undulations developed in areas where Snail was expressed, and proliferative markers persisted in these regions (Figure 3I and 3J; anti-cyclin D staining). The undulations were accompanied by partial dissolution of the underlying basement membrane (Figure 3K and 3L). Aberrant staining was also observed with antibodies against components of the hemidesmosomes, which provide strong adhesion of basal epidermal cells to the underlying basal lamina (Figure 3M and 3N). Interestingly, similar types of alterations occur in the basement membrane in the hair bud of embryonic and newborn mice when Snail is normally expressed. The fact that the basement membrane separating the epidermis from the dermis is altered only in the adult Tg animals suggests the involvement of intermediary factors not as readily available in the epidermis as they are in the follicle.

Possible Links between Epidermal Hyperproliferation and Down-regulation of AJ Proteins in Snail Tg Mice

Given that the E-cadherin promoter is a direct target for Snail-mediated repression in vitro [4,12,13], and that E-cadherin was down-regulated in Snail-expressing hair buds, we examined the status of E-cadherin and other AJ proteins within regions of hyperproliferative epidermis where Tg Snail was present (Figure 4A). In these regions, immunofluorescence staining of E-cadherin and α-catenin were markedly diminished. In contrast, the intensity of antibody staining for two other AJ proteins, β-catenin and Ajuba, was still strong. Interestingly, however, despite appreciable immunofluorescence, localization of β-catenin and Ajuba appeared to be largely cytoplasmic rather than at cell-cell borders (Figure 4A insets).

Architectural differences in the epidermis made Western blot analyses somewhat difficult to gauge. However, in regions such as ear skin, where the highest levels of Snail protein were expressed, the effects were accentuated. In both back skin and ear skin, overall levels of E-cadherin and α-catenin were reduced, under conditions where β-catenin and Ajuba levels remained unchanged relative to controls (Figure 4B). Taken together, these data were consistent with our results obtained from immunofluorescence microscopy.

A priori, the decrease in α-catenin levels could be due to either direct transcriptional repression by Snail or perturbations in AJ formation caused by the decrease in E-cadherin gene expression. To distinguish between these possibilities, we tested whether α-catenin levels could be restored by exogenous expression of E-cadherin in Snail-expressing keratinocytes. As shown in Figure 4C, transiently transfected keratinocytes expressing HA-tagged Snail displayed a loss of E-cadherin and α-catenin at cell-cell borders. Coexpression of exogenous HA-tagged E-cadherin not only enabled cell-cell border localization of E-cadherin protein, but also rescued the cell-cell border staining of α-catenin (Figure 4C). The ability to restore α-catenin expression and localization under these conditions argues against the notion that Snail transcriptionally represses α-catenin. Rather, the findings are consistent with a previous report that E-cadherin is required for the translation of α-catenin mRNA [22].

Despite the reductions in AJ markers, Tg skin still displayed sealed membranes and intercellular junctions that were largely intact, as judged by ultrastructural analyses (unpublished data). In this respect, the skin epithelium resembled that of the hair bud, where the down-regulation in junction proteins is permissive for cell-cell remodeling without abrogating intercellular adhesion.

The similarities between Snail Tg epidermis and hair buds extended to the hyperproliferative state, leading us to wonder whether the down-regulation of AJ proteins might contribute to this condition. Given the increase in pMAPK staining in Snail Tg epidermis (see Figure 2G), we used pMAPK levels as our assay to test whether the loss of E-cadherin contributed to the Snail-mediated increase in proliferation. Consistent with our in vivo observations, transfected keratinocytes expressing Snail exhibited a substantial increase in pMAPK levels relative to control cells (Figure 4D). Coexpression of E-cadherin with Snail appeared to abrogate this effect. Together, these findings raised the possibility that an AJ-associated protein that is normally sequestered at the plasma membrane may participate in a proliferation signaling pathway when AJs are deconstructed.

Numerous studies have correlated a down-regulation of E-cadherin with a translocation of β-catenin to the nucleus and a transactivation of genes that are regulated by the LEF-1/T cell factor (TCF) family of DNA binding proteins [23,24,25]. The presence of nuclear cyclin D in hyperproliferative Snail Tg epidermis was particularly intriguing since prior studies have reported cyclin D gene as a direct target of TCF/β-catenin transcription [26]. This said, we did not detect nuclear β-catenin in our Tg epidermis, and mating the Snail Tg mice against the TOPGal reporter mouse [20] gave no signs of ectopic LEF-1/Tcf/β-catenin activity (unpublished data).

We next turned to the presence of cytoplasmic Ajuba for a possible mechanistic link to the proliferative increase in our Snail Tg epidermis. In addition to its documented ability to bind α-catenin [10], Ajuba can also associate with growth factor receptor-bound protein-2 (Grb-2)/son of sevenless (Sos), the nucleotide exchange factor for Ras, which is upstream from activation of MAPK [9]. Given the increase in pMAPK staining in Tg skin, we examined the possibility that Ajuba might have changed its binding partner in Snail-expressing epidermis. Interestingly, Ajuba was readily detected in anti-Grb-2 immunoprecipitates of protein lysates from skins of Snail Tg mice but not from the corresponding wild-type (WT) animals (Figure 4E). When these experiments were repeated with α-catenin-null epidermis, a similar Grb-2-Ajuba association was detected, and again, this interaction was not detected in the protein extracts from control littermate skin (Figure 4E). Together, these data demonstrate that the reduction in α-catenin levels, either by Snail-mediated down-regulation of E-cadherin or by α-catenin conditional targeting, allows Ajuba to interact with Grb-2/Sos.

If the competition between Grb-2/Sos and α-catenin for Ajuba is functionally relevant to the hyperproliferative state of a keratinocyte, then overexpression of Ajuba would be expected to bypass the competition and promote activation of the Ras-MAPK pathway in WT keratinocytes. Indeed, when serum-starved keratinocytes were transiently transfected with an Ajuba expression vector, the levels of pMAPK were not only elevated but also comparable to those transfected with the K14-HASnail transgene (Figure 4F). This activation was abolished when cells were treated with a small peptide inhibitor that specifically interrupts the Grb-2/Sos interaction (Figure 4F; see lanes marked “inh”) [27].

Ajuba's pre-LIM domain is the segment that associates with Grb-2's Src-homology 3 domain [9]. When this domain was overexpressed in serum-starved keratinocytes, a comparable elevation in pMAPK was observed (Figure 4F). As expected, the small peptide inhibitor that interrupts the Grb-2/Sos association blocked the effects. These data suggested that by elevating cytosolic Ajuba levels, Ajuba's pre-LIM domain may associate with Grb-2/Sos in a manner that stimulates its nucleotide exchange activity and leads to activation of the Ras-MAPK pathway. Although this pathway provides one mechanism by which Snail expression and proliferation may be coupled in skin epithelium, proliferative circuitries involving AJs are known to be complex and often interwoven. Future studies will be needed to systematically dissect these putative intricacies at a molecular level.

Probing the Regulation of Snail Gene Expression Reveals an Essential Link to TGF-β2 Signaling in the Developing Hair Bud

The temporal spike of Snail mRNA expression in the hair bud prompted us to consider what factor(s) may be regulating the Snail gene. A variety of extracellular signals have an impact on the cell type-specific expression of different Snail family members, and many of them, including Wnts, BMPs, FGFs, and TGF-βs, also affect hair bud development [2,16,28]. Since Snail is not expressed in cultured skin keratinocytes that secrete active BMPs and FGFs (see Figure 1B), we focused our attention on Wnt and TGF-β signaling as more likely candidates for Snail induction in this cell type.

Previously, we showed that effective transmission of a Wnt-3a signal in cultured keratinocytes can be achieved through their exposure to the BMP inhibitor noggin, which induces LEF-1 expression [4]. In vitro, these conditions down-regulated the E-cadherin promoter and induced a LEF-1/β-catenin-sensitive reporter gene, TOPFLASH [4]. In contrast, Snail expression was not induced by these conditions (Figure 5A). Thus, despite essential roles for Wnts and noggin in hair follicle specification [4,29,30], our studies did not support an essential role for these signals in governing Snail expression in keratinocytes.

TGF-β1 has been shown to induce Snail family members in hepatocytes and heart [15, 31]. In keratinocytes, however, TGF-β1 inhibits keratinocyte growth and seems to be involved in triggering the destructive phase of the cycling hair follicle [32]. Of the loss-of-function mutations generated in each of the TGF-β genes, only the TGF-β2 null state blocked follicle development at the hair bud stage [32]. Thus, we turned towards addressing whether TGF-β2 might be involved in regulating Snail expression in keratinocytes isolated from the basal layer of the epidermis. Though there is no cell culture system available to specifically study placodal cells, these keratinocytes are their progenitors and are the closest approximation available to study the behavior of epithelial cells of the placode.

Interestingly, treatment of cultured keratinocytes with as little as 5 ng/ml of TGF-β2 caused a rapid and transient induction of Snail (Figure 5B). Following this treatment, Snail protein was detected within 30 min, peaked at 2 h, and then declined thereafter. The induction of Snail appeared to be specific for the active form of the growth factor, as pretreatment of TGF-β2 for 10 min at 100 °C obliterated the response [Figure 5B, lanes marked (–)]. By contrast, although TGF-β receptor activation remained elevated during the duration of the experiment (as measured by the sustained phosphorylation of the downstream effector SMAD2) Snail expression could not be maintained (Figure 5B). Thus, although Snail expression correlated with phosphorylated SMAD2 (pSMAD2) induction, its decline seemed to rely on secondary downstream events.

The rapid kinetics of Snail expression were reflected at the mRNA level, suggesting that Snail promoter activity in keratinocytes might be sensitive to TGF-β2 signaling (Figure 5C). To test this possibility, we engineered a transgene driving the β-galactosidase reporter under the control of approximately 2.2 kb of promoter sequence located 5′ from the transcription initiation site of the mouse Snail gene. At 2 d after transient transfection, keratinocytes were treated with TGF-β2 (t = 0) and then assayed for transgene activity over the same time course in which we had observed Snail protein induction. The results of this experiment are presented in Figure 5D.

Within 0.5 h of TGF-β2 treatment, Snail promoter activity had increased 3-fold, and by 2 h, it peaked to approximately 10-fold over control levels (Figure 5D). Thereafter, Snail promoter activity rapidly returned to the basal levels seen in unstimulated keratinocytes. The kinetics of Snail promoter activity closely paralleled those observed for Snail protein induction. Moreover, the stimulatory effects appeared to be specific to TGF-β2, since they were abrogated either by heat inactivation of the TGF-β2 protein or by mutation of a putative SMAD binding element located about 1.8 kb 5′ from the Snail transcription start site (Figure 5D). Taken together, these results suggested that in keratinocytes, TGF-β2 signaling results in a pSMAD2-dependent transient activation of the Snail gene, and that maintenance of Snail protein relies, in part, upon sustained promoter activity.

The brevity of Snail gene and protein induction in TGF-β2 treated cultured keratinocytes resembled the temporal appearance of Snail mRNA and protein at the initiation of hair follicle morphogenesis in embryonic mouse skin. To test whether TGF-β2 might be required for Snail induction in hair bud formation in vivo, we first analyzed whether TGF-β2 was expressed in or around the hair bud. Consistent with previous observations [33], an anti-TGF-β2 antibody labeled developing hair buds (Figure 6A). This labeling appeared to be specific as judged by the lack of staining in follicle buds from mice homozygous for a TGF-β2 null mutation (Figure 6A; [34]). Moreover, the downstream effector of TGF-β2 signaling, pSMAD2, was also expressed in WT, but not TGF-β2-null, hair buds (Figure 6B). Together, these data underscore the importance of the TGF-β2 isoform despite expression of both TGF-β1 and TGF-β2 in developing hair buds at this stage.

To further explore the possible relation between Snail and TGF-β2, we examined the status of Snail expression in TGF-β2-null hair buds. As judged by immunohistochemistry, Snail protein was absent from E17.5 skin of TGF-β2-null embryos but not from that of control littermates (Figure 6C). This effect appeared to be exerted at the transcriptional level, since Snail mRNAs were also not found in TGF-β2 null hair buds under conditions in which the signal was readily detected in the hair buds of littermate skin (Figure 6D).

Conversely, in 2-wk-old K14-Smad2 Tg mice, which display elevated TGF-β signaling in skin [35], Snail protein was readily detected by Western blot analyses, where it was not found in postnatal skin (Figure 6E). Taken together, these results provide compelling evidence that TGF-β2 is functionally important for inducing Snail gene expression in a pSMAD-dependent manner in developing hair buds. Whether pMARK activity also contributes to Snail induction was not addressed in the present study [15].

Although some hair buds still formed in TGF-β2 null skin, their number was reduced by approximately 50% [32]. Thus, although the pathway mediated by TGF-β2 signaling impacts the earliest step of epithelial invagination, it does not appear to be essential for bud morphogenesis. Consistent with this notion, basement membrane remodeling still took place in the TGF-β2-null buds, as judged by immunofluorescence with antibodies against β4 integrin, an integral component of keratinocyte-mediated adhesion to its underlying basement membrane (Figure 6F). In contrast, TGF-β2 signaling appeared to be an important factor for the early proliferation that occurs in the developing hair buds, as judged by anti-Ki67 and anti-pMAPK immunofluorescence (Figure 6F and 6G).

If TGF-β2 stimulates Snail expression in developing buds, loss of this morphogen would be expected to affect the expression of genes that are typically repressed by Snail. Since a major target for Snail-mediated repression is the E-cadherin gene [12,13], we investigated the status of E-cadherin in TGF-β2-null buds. As shown in Figure 6H, hair buds in TGF-β2 null skin displayed elevated immunofluorescence staining relative to their WT counterparts.

Previously we demonstrated that the concerted action of the extracellular signals Wnt and noggin are required for the generation of a LEF-1/β-catenin transcription complex to repress E-cadherin transcription at the onset of hair fate specification. As shown in Figure 6I and 6J, both WT and TGF-β2 null buds exhibited nuclear LEF-1 and β-catenin localization, signs that the Wnt-noggin signaling pathway was intact. These data suggest that during hair follicle morphogenesis, TGF-β2 functions subsequently to Wnt/noggin-mediated determination of hair fate. Moreover, through activation of Snail gene expression, TGF-β2 appears to work in tandem with these other morphogens to down-regulate E-cadherin levels, which contributes to the activation of proliferative circuitries.

Discussion

During budding morphogenesis, intersecting signaling networks from the epithelium and mesenchyme govern transcriptional, adhesive, polarity, and motility programs in these select groups of cells. The dynamic nuclear and cytosolic changes that take place during this time form the cornerstone for organ morphogenesis. Two major challenges in understanding the mechanisms underlying a particular budding process are to order the temporal sequence of external cues involved and then to dissect how the cells of the developing bud translate these signals into the downstream events of cellular remodeling, proliferation, and differentiation. Our studies here provide some insights into how these events are orchestrated during hair bud formation in developing skin.

Signaling during Early Hair Follicle Morphogenesis

Recent studies on hair bud morphogenesis suggest that Wnt signals likely from the epithelium and BMP inhibitory signals from the underlying mesenchyme converge to produce an active transcription factor complex involving β-catenin and LEF-1, which in turn plays a key role in specifying the hair follicle fate [4,29,30,36,37]. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and TGF-β2 signaling also play essential roles in follicle morphogenesis, but in contrast to β-catenin null skin, in which follicle invaginations are absent [30], some hair buds still form in the absence of LEF-1, Shh, or TGF-β2 [32,38]. These likely reflect the first wave of follicle (i.e., guard hair) morphogenesis, which accounts for a small number (fewer than 5%) of hairs and is under distinct regulatory control. Guard hairs form in the absence of LEF-1 and TGF-β2, and we have found that they also fail to express Snail at the budding stage of development (unpublished data). How E-cadherin is regulated in guard hairs remains to be determined. Several candidates include other Snail family members such as Slug or twist, or alternatively, transcription factors involving β-catenin and a different member of the LEF-1/TCF/Sry-type HMG box (commonly known as SOX) family [39,40]. Further investigation will be required to determine whether the signaling pathway we have elucidated here is a theme with multiple variations.

TGF-βs are known to promote withdrawal of keratinocytes from the cell cycle [41]. Hence, when TGF-β2 protein was detected at the transition between the growing and destructive phases of the adult hair cycle, research initially and naturally focused on a role for this family member in cessation of growth and/or triggering apoptosis ([42] and references therein). However, in contrast to TGF-β1-null skin, which exhibits an extended growing phase of postnatal hair follicles, TGF-β2-null skin displays an embryonic block in follicle bud progression [32]. Although this phenotype is consistent with TGF-β2's embryonic expression patterns [33], about 50% of TGF-β2 null buds appear unable to progress to the down-growth phase, a feature that cannot be explained readily on the basis of previously established effects of TGF-βs.

Our finding that TGF-β2 is upstream from Ki67 expression and MAPK activation lends further support to the notion that hair follicle keratinocytes at this early stage of development react to TGF-β2 signaling in a fashion opposite to that typically expected for TGF-β factors. This said, based upon pSMAD2 immunohistochemistry, the immediate steps of downstream signaling appeared to be intact. Thus, we surmise that the proliferative outcome is likely to be rooted in differences in the repertoire of activated SMAD target genes. In this regard, the positive effects of TGF-β2 on proliferation within the hair bud may be more analogous to what has been seen in progression of squamous cell carcinoma to metastatic carcinoma [43] rather than that typically observed for keratinocytes [44,45,46].

The prior identification of the Snail gene as a potential target of TGF-β signaling [15] was intriguing, given the temporal wave of Snail gene expression that occurs in the developing hair bud. The additional correlation between epithelial hyperproliferation and Snail transgene expression further fostered our interest in a possible link between TGF-β2 and Snail. Our functional studies demonstrate that without TGF-β2, Snail expression is abolished in the mutant hair buds, and conversely, in K14-Smad2 skin, Snail is ectopically activated. Moreover, our in vitro studies indicate that even sustained TGF-β2 exposure may cause only a transient induction of Snail, offering a possible explanation as to why Snail is so briefly expressed during hair follicle morphogenesis. An additional point worth mentioning is that prolonged expression of Tg Snail in postnatal skin resulted in morphological and biochemical signs of epithelial to mesenchymal transitions (unpublished data), underscoring why transient Snail expression may be so important during normal hair follicle morphogenesis [18].

At first glance, the sparsity in hair coat of K14-Snail Tg mice seemed indicative of a defect in follicle formation (see Figure 2A). Closer inspection, however, revealed that not all hairs penetrated the hyperthickened Tg epidermis. Several factors may contribute to the seemingly normal follicle development in these mice. One obvious factor is the K14 promoter, which is elevated in the basal layer of the epidermis and the outer root sheath (ORS) of the hair follicle, but is markedly down-regulated in developing embryonic hair buds as well as in the postnatal hair progenitor cells. The K14 promoter is also less active in the ORS than epidermis and hence this might also account for the lack of apparent response of the ORS to ectopic Snail. Additional contributing factors could be the multiplicity of Snail family members and their differential expression, the saturation, and/or diversity of regulatory mechanisms that govern AJ formation, migration, and proliferation in the follicle ORS. Distinguishing between these possibilities must await the generation of mice harboring skin-specific loss-of-function Snail mutations.

Links between Signaling, Transcriptional Cascades, Epithelial Remodeling, and Proliferation in the Hair Bud

Previously, we discovered that early during hair follicle morphogenesis, E-cadherin gene expression is down-regulated concomitantly with the invagination of developing bud cells into the skin [4]. Because the timing of this event correlated with the activation of a LEF-1/β-catenin transcription factor complex [20], we were intrigued by the presence of a putative LEF-1/TCF binding site in the E-cadherin promoter. This prompted an investigation that subsequently led to our discovery that LEF-1/β-catenin can contribute to repression of E-cadherin gene expression in skin keratinocytes [4]. In the course of these studies, we also noted that Snail can also contribute to this process in keratinocytes in vitro, and our present studies revealed that Snail is expressed at the right place and time to be physiologically relevant in the process.

In noggin-null embryonic skin, LEF-1 expression and subsequent activation of the LEF-1/β-catenin reporter gene is abrogated in the developing placodes. The corresponding failure of E-cadherin down-regulation underscores the importance of Wnt/noggin signaling in regulating this event in follicle morphogenesis [4]. Conditional gene targeting studies will be necessary to establish whether Snail family members also contribute to the down-regulation in E-cadherin gene expression that occurs during follicle formation. However, it is intriguing that K14-Snail Tg epidermis displayed a marked down-regulation in E-cadherin expression, thereby demonstrating its potential to do so in skin. Our prior findings showed that by elevating E-cadherin levels or by conditionally ablating α-catenin, hair follicle morphogenesis can be impaired [4,7]. The marked epidermal hyperproliferation seen in the K14-Snail Tg skin, coupled with the converse suppression of proliferation and Snail in TGF-β2-null hair buds led us to wonder whether the down-regulation of E-cadherin during follicle morphogenesis might have a direct impact on elevating the proliferative state of these cells.

Our Tg studies suggested that, at least in part through its regulation of E-cadherin, Snail is able to influence the subcellular localization of a variety of AJ-associated proteins. One of these appears to be Ajuba, which was previously shown to have the dual capacity to bind Grb-2 as well as α-catenin [9,10]. Our studies revealed that in skin keratinocytes that either harbor a conditional null mutation in α-catenin or that overexpress Snail, Ajuba develops an interaction with Grb-2 that is otherwise not observed in WT keratinocytes. The corresponding abilities of either Snail-transfected or Ajuba-transfected keratinocytes to exhibit elevated activation of the Ras-MAPK pathway suggest that the Grb-2 association of Ajuba under conditions of reduced levels of AJ proteins may be directly relevant to the parallel in hyperproliferation.

In stable epithelial (i.e., Madin-Darby canine kidney, or MDCK) cell lines, Snail has been shown to block cell cycle progression and promote motility and shape changes for invasion [47]. While our in vivo studies are consistent with a role for Snail in motility and epithelial remodeling, they differ with respect to Snail's apparent proliferative effects. A priori, this could be simply due to variations in the response of different cell types to Snail expression. Alternatively, these differences may be relevant to the benefit of using mouse models to reveal functions not always recapitulated in stable cell line models. Future studies should highlight the underlying reasons for these opposing results.

Irrespective of these differences, our in vivo studies do not stand alone, as there are many situations in which a down-regulation in AJ proteins correlate with enhanced proliferation. In fact, a myriad of diverse mechanisms have been implicated in activating epithelial proliferation upon down-regulation of AJ proteins [7,23,24,48]. Sifting through these converging pathways is likely to be a difficult and painstaking process. This said, by identifying the status of different players involved in specific cell types and at specific stages in development, our mechanistic understanding of how intercellular remodeling is linked to proliferation in epithelial morphogenesis should begin to surface in the future. Elucidating the molecular mechanisms through which these networks converge is also a prerequisite for understanding how these processes go awry during tumorigenesis.

Materials and Methods



Reagents

Primary antibodies used were against: E-cadherin (M. Takeichi, Kyoto University, Japan); α-catenin, β-catenin, pMAPK, tubulin (Sigma, St. Louis, Missouri, United States), Ajuba (G. Longmore, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, United States); β4 integrin/CD104 (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, California, United States), laminin 5 (R. Burgeson, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States), K5, K1, loricrin (Fuchs Lab), involucrin, fillagrin (Covance, Berkeley, California, United States), MAPK, pSMAD2 (Cell Signaling, Beverly, Massachusetts, United States); Grb-2 (Santa Cruz Biotech, Santa Cruz, California, United States); P-cadherin (Zymed Laboratories, South San Francisco, California, United States); HA (Roche Biochemicals), vimentin (Chemicon, Temecula, California, United States), Ki67 (Novo Castra, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom), keratin 6 (P. Coulombe, John Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, United States), cyclin D (Oncogene, San Diego, California, United States), and TGF-β2 (L. Gold, New York University, New York, New York, United States). FITC-, Texas Red-, or HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were from Jackson ImmunoResearch (West Grove, Pennsylvania, United States). Biotinylated secondary antibodies were from Vector Labs (Burlingame, California, United States). Dilutions were according to the manufacturer's recommendation. The Snail antibody was generated in Guinea pigs by inoculating them with the N-terminal sequence of murine Snail fused to GST (Covance, Princeton, New Jersey, United States). Recombinant human TGF-β2 was purchased from R&D (Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States). Heat inactivated TGF-β2 was generated by heating the recombinant protein at 100 °C for 10 min.

Mice

The K14-Snail Tg mouse was generated by digesting the pcDNA3-mm Snail-HA plasmid (G. de Herreros, Universitat Pompeu, Fabra, Barcelona, Spain) with BamHI and NotI and subcloned into the K14 vector [49]. The linearized construct was injected into the nucleus of embryos from CD1 mice. The K14-Smad 2 Tg mouse was reported in Ito et al., 2001. The TGF-β2 knockout (KO) mouse was described in [34]. The shh KO mouse [38] and TOPGal mouse [20] have previously been reported.

Western blot and immunoprecipitation

Protein extracts from primary keratinocytes were generated either by lysing cells in lysis buffer (1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 20 mM Tris-Cl [pH 7.4], 140 mM NaCl containing 1 mM sodium vanadate, 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and protease inhibitors) or directly in Laemmli bβuffer and boiled. For skin tissue: Frozen tissue was pulverized in a liquid nitrogen-cooled Gevebesmascher and the powder scraped into a chilled microcentrifuge tube. RIPA buffer (1% Triton X-100 in PBS with 10 mM EDTA, 150 mN NaCl, 1% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% SDS) and protease inhibitors or Laemmli buffer was added. The cell suspension was sonicated three times for 15 s and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4 °C. The supernatant was separated from the pellet and used in the experiments. Extracts subjected to immunoprecipitation were precleared with Protein G Sepharose (Amersham, Piscataway, New York, United States) and incubated with antibody with rocking overnight at 4 °C. Protein G Sepharose was added and samples were incubated for 1 h at 4 °C with rocking. Samples were washed three times for 5 min each in lysis buffer, and the Protein G Sepharose-antibody-antigen pellet was resuspended in Laemmli buffer and boiled for 10 min. Samples were run on SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane (Schleicher and Schuell Bioscience, Keene, New Hampshire, United States). Western blot signals were developed using the enhanced chemiluminescence kit from Amersham

Cell culture

Primary keratinocytes were culture in low-calcium medium as previously described [4]. Transient transfections were carried out with FuGENE6 reagent (Roche, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Measurement of β-galactosidase or luciferase levels in promoter activity studies were carried out with the Galacto-Lite assay kit (TROPIX, Bedford, Massachusetts, United States) and the Dual luciferase (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, United States), respectively. Runella luciferase was cotransfected into cells to correct for transfection efficiency. Experiments were done in triplicate and repeated at least three times. Measurements were done on a luminometer (MGM Instruments, Hamden, Connecticut, United States). For experiments measuring phosphorylation of MAPK, keratinocytes were serum starved for 3 h prior to harvesting of cells by incubation in medium lacking serum. Treatment of cells with Wnt- and noggin-conditioned medium was previously described [4].

Constructs

The 2.2-kb murine Snail promoter was generated by PCR using a forward primer with an XbaI linker sequence, 5′-TCTAGAATTGTTTGCTGCTGTATGGTCTTC-3′, along with a reverse primer with a BglII linker sequence, 5′-AGATCTGTTGGCCAGAGCGACCTAG-GTAG-3′, and mouse genomic DNA as a template. The PCR product was purified with the Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, California, United States) and ligated into pCRII-TOPO TA vector (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, United States). The promoter was verified by sequencing and digested with XbaI and BglII and subcloned into the pβ-gal BASIC vector (BD Biosciences Clontech, Palo Alto, California, United States). The point mutations in the SMAD binding element was generated with the Quik-Change Kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, California, United States) using the forward primer 5′-GGGCGGGCTTAGGTGTTTTCATTTACTCTTGAGGAAAAGCTTGGC-3′ and the reverse primer 5′-GCTTTT-CCTCAAGAGTAAATGAAAACACCTAAGCCCGCCCTGCCC-3′. The probes for the Snail in situ hybridization were generated against the 3′ UTR by PCR using the forward primer 5′-ACCTTCTCCCGCATGTCCTTGCTCC-3′ and the reverse primer 5′-CTGCTGAGGCATGGTTACAGCTGG-3′, and genomic DNA as a template. The PCR product was gel purified and ligated into pCRII-TOPO TA vector. The pre-LIM domain of Ajuba was generated essentially as described [9], but was fused to GFP by subcloning from the pEGFP-N1 20 vector (BD Biosciences Clontech)

In situ hybridization

The pCRII-TOPO TA vector containing a region of the 3′ UTR of Snail was used as a template to generate digoxigenin-labeled sense and antisense riboprobes (Roche). The respective probes were obtained by XhoI and BamH1 digestions. In situ hybridizations were performed on 10-μm thick sections of E17.5 mouse embryos. The sections were fixed with 4% PFA for 10 min at room temperature, prehybridized at room temperature for 4.5 h, hybridized with the probe (2 μg/ml) at 55 °C for 12–14 h, blocked with 10% NGS, and treated with anti-dig Fab-AP antibody (Roche #1093274) at a 1:2,500 dilution for 3 h. The sections were incubated with NBT and BCIP until adequate signal was detected.

Immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry

Tissue samples for immunofluorescence were frozen in OCT and sectioned 10 μm thick on a cryostat. Sections were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature, blocked, and stained with antibodies. Tissue samples for immunohistochemistry were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, dehydrated, and embedded in paraffin. Samples were sectioned on a microtome (10 μm thick) and rehydrated prior to staining with antibody. Samples stained with Snail, pMAPK, pSmad2, and cyclin D were antigen unmasked with 10 mM sodium citrate (pH 6) in an Antigen Retriever 2100 (Pickcell Laboratories, Leiden, Netherlands). The DAB substrate kit (Vector Labs) was used according to manufacturer's instructions to develop the signal.

RT-PCR

RNA was extracted from keratinocytes or skin tissue with Trizol (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. cDNA was generated using oligo-dT primers and the Superscript II kit (Invitrogen). The primers used for PCR were Snail forward: 5′-CAGCTGGCCAGGCTCTCGGT-3′; Snail reverse: 5′-GCGAGGGCCTCCGGAGCA-3′; GAPDH forward 5′-CGTAGACAAAATGGTGAAGGTCGG-3′; and GAPDH reverse: 5′-AAGCAGTTGGTGGTGCAGGATG-3′.

Acknowledgements

We thank M Takeichi, P Coulombe, G Longmore, and L Gold for sharing their antibodies, and AG de Herreros for the Snail construct. L Degenstein and L Polak from the Fuchs laboratory provided outstanding technical assistance with transgenic work and animal husbandry. T Doetschman and Y Chai are acknowledged for the TGF-β2 KO and K14-Smad2 mice, respectively. We thank additional members of the Fuchs lab for generously sharing their reagents and ideas. CJ was partially supported by a fellowship from the Helen Hay Whitney Foundation. EF is an investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. This work was supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and a grant from the National Institutes of Health.

Competing interests. The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

Abbreviations

AJ - adherens junction

BMP - bone morphogenic protein

EMT - epithelial to mesenchymal transition

E[number] - embryonic day [number]

FGF - fibroblast growth factor

Grb-2 - growth factor receptor-bound protein-2

HA - hemaglutinin

K1 - keratin 1

K5 - keratin 5

KO - knockout

LEF-1 - lymphoid enhancer factor-1

LIM - Lin-1

MAPK - mitogen-activated protein kinase

ORS - outer root sheath

pMAPK - phosphorylated MAPK

P[number] - postnatal day [number]

pSMAD - phosphorylated SMAD

Shh - sonic hedgehog

SMADs - small phenotype– and mothers against decapentaplegic–related proteins

Sos - son of sevenless

SOX - Sry-type HMG box

TCF - T cell factor

Tg - transgenic

TGF-β - transforming growth factor β

TOP - TCF-optimal-promoter

UTR - untranslated region

WT - wild-type

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Snail Is Expressed Exclusively in the Hair Bud during Morphogenesis

Embryos were either frozen in OCT embedding compound (A, F, and H) or embedded in paraffin (C, D, E, and G), and then sectioned (8 μm).

(A) In situ hybridizations with Snail sense or antisense cRNA probes. Black dotted lines demarcate the basement membrane that separates the epidermis (epi) from dermis (der). Arrows point to Snail RNA expression, restricted to the hair bud stage of follicle morphogenesis. It was not seen in later hair germ or peg stages.

(B) Expression of Snail protein coincides with hair development. Protein extracts were prepared from keratinocytes transfected with empty expression vector (K14), containing the K14 promoter or with the vector driving HA-tagged Snail (K14-Snail); or from whole skin from E13.5 to P5 animals, including newborn (nb). Equal amounts of proteins were then resolved by SDS-PAGE through 12% gels and subjected to Western blotting using either an affinity-purified Snail polyclonal antiserum, which we generated, or anti-tubulin (loading control).

(C–E) Immunohistochemistry shows expression of Snail protein in the nuclei of cells within the hair and skin. (C) E13.5 skin with a single layered epidermis (epi) shows no Snail expression. (D) The first morphological sign that cells have adopted a hair follicle fate is a cluster of cells called a placode in E16.5 skin. Snail is not expressed at this stage of development. (E) Snail is expressed in the hair bud of E17.5 skin but not in later stages of development such as the germ or peg.

(F) Immunofluorescence with anti-Ki67 (green) identifies the proliferating cells of the skin, restricted to the basal layer of the epidermis and developing hair follicles. Anti-β4 int labeling reveals the presence of the hemidesmosomal integrin β4, restricted to the base of cells adhering to the underlying basement membrane. The white dotted line marks the outermost surface of the skin.

(G) Immunohistochemistry with pMAPK marks a subset of proliferating cells within the epidermis and hair bud. Anti-pMAPK labeling was consistently robust within the hair bud.

(H) Immunofluorescence with anti-laminin 5 (lam5), which demarcates the basement membrane, and anti-E-cadherin (E-cad), a component of AJs. At the leading edge of the growing bud, cell-cell borders show markedly diminished anti-E-cadherin labeling (arrowheads).

Figure 2

Misexpression of Snail in Mouse Skin Epidermis Results in Hyperproliferation

Three different surviving Tg founder mice harbored a K14-Snail transgene that was integrated into a locus that resulted in inheritable, mosaic expression of the transgene in skin epidermis. All displayed similar abnormalities, as did their offspring.

(A) P16 WT and K14-Snail Tg mice. Insets denote magnified tail segments, which displayed a mosaic, flaky appearance in Tg mice. Size differences appeared with age, and are likely due to K14-promoter activity in the tongue and oral epithelium, resulting in progressive defects and reduced food intake. Hence, skin sections from young (P3) mice were analyzed (B–I).

(B) Hematoxylin- and eosin-stained Tg skin section. Double arrows demarcate the border of mosaic histology, with seemingly normal epidermis (epi) and a mature hair follicle (hf) at left and hyperthickened epidermis at right.

(C) Immunofluorescence of Tg skin section labeled with antibodies as color-coded on frame. Double arrows demarcate the border of mosaic anti-Snail (green), revealing Snail expression coincident with regions of hyperthickened epidermis (at left) and absent in regions of normal epidermis (at right).

(D–I) Sections of P3 WT or Tg skin (affected region) subjected to either immunofluorescence (D, E, H, and I) or immunohistochemistry (F and G) with antibodies as indicated on the panel. Anti-keratin 5 indicates K5, normally restricted to the basal layer of the epidermis; anti-keratin 6 detects keratin 6, expressed in postnatal epidermis under conditions such as wounding, in which hyperproliferation occurs. All other antibodies are as in the legend to Figure 2. Comparison of D and E provide representative examples that illustrate that pMAPK is found in only a subset of all proliferating (Ki67-positive) cells. Note also the presence of Ki67- (E) and pMAPK-positive (G) cells in some suprabasal areas; Ki67-positive cells colabeled with anti-Snail (E).

Figure 3

Alterations in the Differentiation Program and Basement Membrane Organization in Snail-Expressing Tg Epidermis

(A–H) Immunofluorescence of skin sections from P3 WT and Tg mice. Shown are affected areas of Tg skin; in areas where Snail protein was not expressed, stainings were normal. Sections were labeled with antibodies as indicated and color-coded on each frame. Antibodies are against markers of normal epidermal differentiation, and include K5 (a basally expressed keratin), K1 (a suprabasal keratin, expressed in spinous layer cells), involucrin (Inv; a suprabasally expressed cornified envelope protein found in upper spinous and granular layer cells), loricrin (Lor; a cornified envelope protein expressed in the granular layer), and filaggrin (Fil; a protein that bundles keratin filaments in the granular layer and stratum corneum). Note abnormal extension of anti-K5 suprabasally, often present in anti-K1 positive suprabasal Tg cells.

(I–N) Immunohistochemistry (I and J) or immunofluorescence (K–N) of sections of P30 Wt (I, K, and M) and Tg (J, L, and N) (affected areas) skins using the antibodies indicated. Note that with age, affected areas of the Tg epidermis became increasingly undulating, often exhibiting papilloma-like invaginations (J). Insets in I and J are magnified views of the boxed areas, illustrating the absence (Wt) or presence (Tg) of nuclear anti-cyclin D staining. With age, affected areas of the Tg epidermis also displayed perturbations within the basement membrane, as judged by antibody labeling against either basement membrane (K and L) or hemidesmosomal (M and N) components. Double arrows in L demarcate mosaic zones, revealing that perturbations were restricted to hyperthickened, i.e., Snail-positive zones (to left of double arrows). Other abbreviations are as noted in the legend to Figure 2.

Figure 4

Snail-Mediated Remodeling of AJs Contributes to Hyperproliferation

(A) Immunofluorescence of skin sections from P30 Wt and Tg mice. Shown are affected areas of Tg skin; in areas where Snail protein was not expressed, stainings were normal. Antibodies used are against AJ proteins and include E-cadherin (E-cad), the transmembrane core protein; β-catenin (β-cat), which binds E-cadherin at AJs and which can also participate as a transcription cofactor when associated with LEF-1/TCF proteins in the nucleus; α-catenin (α-cat) which binds to both β-catenin and Ajuba, a close relative of zyxin; and Ajuba, which can associate with proteins that bind to the actin cytoskeleton, as well as with Grb-2, a mediator of the GTP nucleotide-exchange protein Sos, involved in activation of the Ras-MAPK signaling cascade. In Snail-expressing Tg regions, there was a reduced staining with anti-E-cad and anti-α-cat and a more diffuse staining with anti-Ajuba. Insets in the panels for β-catenin and Ajuba staining are magnified views of the boxed areas. Arrows mark membrane localization of the protein and asterisks mark cells with elevated levels of cytoplasmic β-catenin or Ajuba.

(B) Western blot analyses of protein extracts from P30 Wt and Tg back and ear skins. Antibodies are as in (A) except anti-P-cad, which detects P-cadherin, whose expression in the hair follicle was not affected, and anti-tubulin, which detects tubulin, a control for equal protein loadings. Note that the reductions seen in E-cadherin and α-catenin are likely to be underestimates of the actual differences in affected regions, since the Tg skin expressed Snail mosaically.

(C) In the presence of elevated Snail, α-catenin levels can be restored by overexpression of E-cadherin. Keratinocytes were transfected with either HA-tagged Snail (Snail[HA]; images on the left) or Snail(HA) and Ecad(HA) (images on the right). 2 d after transfection, cells were switched from low-calcium growth medium to high-calcium medium for 6 h to induce AJ formation. Cells were stained with antibodies as indicated on the panels. Arrowheads point to sites of intercellular contact between a Snail-transfected keratinocyte and its neighboring untransfected cell.

(D) Reintroduction of E-cadherin in keratinocytes expressing Snail returns pMAPK to basal levels. Keratinocytes were transfected with control vector (K14), or Snail(HA), or Snail(HA) + E-cad(HA). After 2 d, cells were serum starved for 4 h and whole cell lysates were made and Western blotted with antibodies to pMAPK, HA to recognize the HA-tagged Snail and E-cadherin protein, 20or tubulin as a loading control.

(E) Ajuba interacts with Grb-2 under conditions where α-catenin levels are reduced. Protein extracts were made from skins of P30 Wt and K14-Snail Tg P30 mice (blots on the left) and of newborn Wt and K14-Cre/α-catenin (fl/fl) conditionally null animals (blots on the right) [7]. Equal amounts of protein extracts were treated with anti-Grb-2 antibody (+) or control isotype antibody (–), and following centrifugation, immunoprecipitates were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis with anti-Ajuba and anti-Grb-2 antibodies. Note the presence of Ajuba only under conditions where levels of α-catenin and other AJ proteins were aberrantly low or absent.

(F) Transgene expression of excess Ajuba or the Grb-2-interacting domain (pre-LIM) of Ajuba in keratinocytes results in the activation of the Ras-MAPK pathway. Primary newborn mouse keratinocytes were transfected with either the empty K14 expression vector (K14), or the expression vector driving Snail, full length Ajuba, or the pre-LIM domain of Ajuba in the absence or presence of a peptide inhibitor (inh) that disrupts the interaction between Grb-2 and Sos. 48 h posttransfection, protein extracts were prepared and subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blot analyses with antibodies against pMAPK, total MAPK, Ajuba (also recognizing the smaller, pre-LIM domain), and Snail.

Figure 5

TGF-β2, but Not Wnt/noggin, Transiently Induces Snail Expression In Vitro

(A) Failure of Wnt and noggin signaling to induce Snail in cultured keratinocytes. Primary mouse keratinocytes were treated with Wnt- and/or noggin-conditioned medium (+) or the corresponding control medium (–). These conditions are known to activate the LEF-1/β-catenin reporter TOPGal and down-regulate the E-cadherin promoter (see [4] for details). Using Western blot analyses, cellular proteins were then analyzed for Snail, LEF-1, β-catenin, and tubulin. Proteins from keratinocytes transfected with K14-Snail were used as a positive control for Snail expression.

(B) TGF-β2 can induce Snail protein. Primary keratinocytes were treated for the indicated times with recombinant TGF-β2 (+) or heat inactivated TGF-β2 (–).Total cellular proteins were then isolated and analyzed by Western blot for Snail, pSMAD2 (reflective of activated TGF- signaling), and tubulin. Note the activation of Snail expression, peaking at 2 h post-TGF-β2 treatment and then disappearing thereafter.

(C) Snail mRNA expression is transiently induced by TGF-β2. The experiment in (B) was repeated, and this time, total RNAs were isolated from keratinocytes treated with TGF-β2 for the indicated times. RT-PCR was then used with (+) or without (–) reverse transcriptase (RT) and with primer sets specific for Snail and GAPDH mRNAs. Note that Snail mRNA expression also peaked at 2 h, paralleling Snail protein.

(D) TGF-β2 treatment results in enhanced activity of a Snail promoter-β-galactosidase reporter. Keratinocytes were transfected with a β-galactosidase reporter driven by a Snail promoter that is either WT (wt prom) or harbors a mutation in a putative pSMAD2/pSMAD4 binding site (mt prom). At 2 d posttransfection, cells were treated with either TGF-β or heat-inactivated TGF-β2 (inact) for the times indicated. β-galactosidase assays were then conducted, and results are reported as fold increase over a basal level of activity of 1. The experiment was repeated three times in triplicate, and error bars reflect variations in the results.

Figure 6

TGF-β2 Is Necessary to Induce Snail Expression and Regulate Proliferation and E-Cadherin in the Hair Bud

(A–D) Skins from TGF-β2 WT or KO E17.5 embryos were analyzed for expression of TGF-β2 protein (A), which is present in the epidermis and dermis as previously described [33] and in the hair bud, pSMAD2 (B), Snail (C), and Snail mRNA (D). Arrows point to the hair buds.

(E) Western blot analyses of Snail expression in the skins of 2-wk-old K14-Smad2 transgenic (SMAD2 TG) and WT littermate (WT) mice. Antibody to tubulin was used as a control for equal protein loadings. The K14-Smad2 Tg mouse was previously shown to possess activated TGF-β signaling [35].

(F–G) Proliferation markers Ki67 (F) and pMAPK (G) are diminished in TGF-β2-null hair relative to its WT counterpart.

(H–J) TGF-β2-null hair fails to down-regulate E-cadherin (H). Wnt and noggin signaling pathways are still intact in the TGF-β2 null hair as nuclear LEF-1 (I) and nuclear β-catenin (J) are still expressed.

Footnotes

Author contributions. CJ and EF conceived and designed the experiments. CJ, PL, and PK performed the experiments. CJ and EF analyzed the data. MA, RH, YC, and EF contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools. CJ and EF wrote the paper.

Note Added in Proof

Our results are particularly interesting in light of the recent implication that GSK-3β controls Snail's stability and subcellular localization [50]. Since Wnts are known to deactivate GSK-3β, Wnt and TGF-β2 signaling may contribute to Snail's transient induction and accumulation. Moreover, since inhibition of GSK-3β results in Snail upregulation and E-cadherin downregulation, Snail and GSK-3β may function at a crossroads in controlling hair bud development.

Citation: Jamora C, Lee P, Kocieniewski P, Azhar M, Hosokawa R, et al. (2004) A signaling pathway involving TGF-β2 and Snail in hair follicle morphogenesis. PLoS Biol 3(1): e11.Synaptogenesis and outer segment formation are perturbed in the neural retina of Crx mutant mice

Abstract

Background

In Leber's congenital amaurosis (LCA), affected individuals are blind, or nearly so, from birth. This early onset suggests abnormal development of the neural retina. Mutations in genes that affect the development and/or function of photoreceptor cells have been found to be responsible in some families. These examples include mutations in the photoreceptor transcription factor, Crx.

Results

A Crx mutant strain of mice was created to serve as a model for LCA and to provide more insight into Crx's function. In this study, an ultrastructural analysis of the developing retina in Crx mutant mice was performed. Outer segment morphogenesis was found to be blocked at the elongation stage, leading to a failure in production of the phototransduction apparatus. Further, Crx-/- photoreceptors demonstrated severely abnormal synaptic endings in the outer plexiform layer.

Conclusions

This is the first report of a synaptogenesis defect in an animal model for LCA. These data confirm the essential role this gene plays in multiple aspects of photoreceptor development and extend our understanding of the basic pathology of LCA.

Background

Photoreceptor cells play a primary role in vision by capturing light energy and converting it into neural stimuli. These sensory neurons are a shared element in all organisms capable of sensing light. In humans, genetic diseases of the eye are common and the primary site of disease is most frequently photoreceptors (for review see [1-3]).

Photoreceptors have been well studied, particularly with respect to the biochemistry and physiology of phototransduction. Insight into the development of vertebrate photoreceptors, however, has lagged behind our understanding of function. Only recently have the first molecular mechanisms regulating photoreceptor development been identified (for review see, [2,4]). Crx (cone-rod homeobox) is an otx-family homeobox gene expressed predominantly in photoreceptors, from early in their development through to the adult ages [5-7]. Crx gene expression is critically dependent upon Otx2, another member of the same homeobox family which is expressed in early photoreceptor cells [8]. In rod photoreceptors, Crx appears to work in concert with Nrl, a leucine zipper protein that is also restricted in its expression in the retina to rod photoreceptors [9]. Many photoreceptor-specific genes have putative Crx-binding elements in their regulatory regions [10], including rhodopsin [11] and arrestin [12]. Mutations in Crx have been associated with several human diseases that lead to blindness, including cone-rod dystrophy 2 [6,13,14], retinitis pigmentosa [14], and LCA [14-16]. Based on these data, Crx was hypothesized to play a critical role in the differentiation and maintainance of photoreceptor cells [5,7].

LCA is the most severe genetic disease of photoreceptors (see [17], for recent review). Affected infants exhibit a complete or near complete absence of vision from birth. Mutations in retinal specific genes, such as Crx, have been associated with LCA [14,15], as well as GUCY2D [18], RPE65 [19], AIPL-1 [20], CRB-1 [21], and RPGRIP-1 [22]. There also may be as many as three additional genetically linked loci where genes have not been identified [23]. Crx mutations in LCA are varied, and include a putative dominant mutation that is proposed to encode a dominant-negative form of Crx [14,15]. Recessive mutations also have been reported and at least one allele encodes a protein with decreased DNA-binding activity [16]. Histopathological and ultrastructural studies of LCA should enable a better understanding of the disease process, and the design of suitable therapies. Few such studies exist for human LCA (reviewed in [17]) and the majority of such studies examine the globes of adults with LCA, after the tissue has undergone secondary changes. Only a single study exists where the developing eye of an infant was examined [24]. Animal models for LCA have recently been reported and have already served to broaden our understanding of the pathology of this disease [25-28]. Since LCA is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder, additional mouse models are in order to allow a full understanding of the many ways in which photoreceptor development can go awry.

In addition to their importance as a locus of disease, photoreceptor cells serve as an excellent model for studies in neuronal differentiation. Photoreceptor cells are highly polarized. At their apex, these neurons have a membranous outer segment, which contains proteins involved in the phototransduction cascade. Loss of function mutations in rhodopsin [29], or the structural protein, peripherin [30], result in an inability to form outer segments. At the other extremity, photoreceptors terminate with synaptic endings that make contact with the processes of horizontal and bipolar cells [31,32]. Rod spherules establish an invaginating synapse with rod bipolar dendrites and axonal endings of horizontal cells. This synapse is characterized by the presence of a ribbon in the presynaptic cytoplasm. Cone pedicles make invaginating synapses with the dendrites of on-cone bipolar cells and horizontal cells and basal junctions with the dendrites of off-cone bipolar cells. The factors regulating the formation of the photoreceptor synapses are completely unknown. At least one photoreceptor synaptic protein, HRG4, contains a potential Crx target sequence in its transcriptional regulatory sequence [33].

Few studies of LCA animal models have extended their examination of retinal pathology to the ultrastructural level. Certain features of neuronal differentiation, such as synapse formation, can be detected definitively at this level of analysis. With the hope of understanding the neuropathology of LCA in greater detail, we have analyzed the differentiation of the outer retina in Crx-/- mice at the ultrastructural level. These retinas exhibit several prominent defects. Crx-/- photoreceptors demonstrate a complete block in outer segment formation at the elongation stage. Further, these cells exhibit abnormal synaptic morphology, thereby broadening the function of Crx to photoreceptor synaptogenesis. This represents the first report strongly implicating the process of synapse formation in LCA.

Results

Multiple pathologies in the outer segment layer in Crx-/- mice

A standard knock-out protocol was used to generate mice in which the homeodomain of Crx-/- was targeted and deleted. Generation of these Crx-/- mice has been reported elsewhere [34]. In this study, in order to characterize further the role of Crx in photoreceptor morphogenesis, the outer retinae from Crx-/- mice were examined using transmission electron microscopy. At postnatal day 21 (P21), when Crx+/+ photoreceptors exhibited robust outer segments (Figure 1A, os), Crx-/- retinas were without a recognizable outer segment layer (Figure 1B). Crx-/- photoreceptors had inner segments, demonstrating at least limited photoreceptor polarization in the Crx mutant, but the inner segments were extremely short (Figure 2). Furthermore, the majority of inner segments showed some morphological differentiation, having approximately as many mitochondria as the control (Figure 1 and 2). Occasionally, an inner segment undergoing lysis was noted, appearing swollen or with vacuoles and swollen mitochondria (data not shown).

Figure 1

Transmission electron microscopy of the outer retina at P21 in (A) Crx+/+ and (B) Crx-/- retinas. pe, pigmented epithelium. os, outer segments. is, inner segments. onl, outer nuclear layer with photoreceptor nuclei. Scale bar = 5 μm for A and B.

Figure 2

Transmission electron micrograph of the outer segment layer of Crx-/- retina at P21. Inner segments of Crx-/- photoreceptors exhibit numerous mitochondria (m indicated by arrow) as in Crx+/+ (Figure 1A). pe, pigmented epithelium. is, inner segments. onl, outer nuclear layer. Scale bar = 2 μm.

Photoreceptor inner segments and outer segments are joined by a non-motile connecting cilium that exhibits a characteristic 9 + 0 arrangement of microtubule doublets when viewed in cross-section. At P21, in Crx-/- retinas, numerous cross sections of connecting cilia were noted (Figure 3A and 3B). Sporadically, connecting cilia contained other than the typical complement of microtubule doublets. For example, in Figure 3A, the connecting cilium labelled by arrowhead 1, shows 7 + 0 doublets. The majority exhibited the characteristic 9 + 0 doublets (arrowhead 2 and 3 in Figure 3A and Figure 3B). These observations indicate that in addition to inner segment formation, ciliogenesis is also largely intact in Crx-/- photoreceptors. Further, in Crx-/- retinas the retinal pigmented epithelium (PE) appeared normal, at least up to P21 (data not shown), the oldest age examined.

Figure 3

Transmission electron micrograph of Crx-/- retina at P21 (A and B), and scanning electron micrograph of Crx-/- at P10 (C) of outer segment layer. (A) Evidence of ciliogenesis in the photoreceptor layer of Crx-/- retina. Nonmotile connecting cilia were observed in cross section (arrowheads 1,2, and 3, for examples). Connecting cilium 1 (arrowhead 1) demonstrated seven microtuble doublets, while cilium 2 and cilium 3 exhibited nine. In A, a displaced cell nucleus (n) appearing pyknotic and abnormal deposition of matrix (mx) material of unknown identity were seen, along with large amounts of membranous vesicles (arrow) which filled the photoreceptor space and appeared to be released from inner segments. Scale bar = 3.7 μm. (B) Nonmotile connecting cilium in cross section, from a Crx-/- photoreceptor, demonstrating characteristic 9+0 radial array of microtubule doublets. Scale bar = 88 nm. (C) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of membranous vesicles (arrow shows one example) shed from inner segments of Crx-/- photoreceptors at P10. Figure shows inner segments viewed from the scleral side with the pigmented epithelium removed. Scale bar = 1 μm.

In addition to the complete absence of outer segments, Crx-/- retinas exhibited three other notable pathologies in the outer segment layer. First, an abnormal deposition of matrix of unknown identity was noted (Figure 3A, mx). Second, sporadically displaced nuclei were found residing in the space abutting the PE. Occasionally, these nuclei appeared pyknotic (Figure 3A, n); but, more frequently exhibited the heterochromatin pattern typical of photoreceptors (data not shown), strongly suggesting that they belonged to ectopic photoreceptors. The third pathological entity noted in the outer segment layer were numerous small vesicles (Figure 3A arrow) 100 to 200 nm in diameter. They appeared to be emerging from the inner segments, as scanning electron microscopic images showed spherical structures budding from the inner segments (Figure 3C, arrow).

In order to characterize further the morphogenesis of Crx-/- photoreceptors, the developing outer segment layer was viewed by scanning electron microscopy at P7, P14 and P21 (Figure 4). In Crx+/+ retinas, photoreceptor inner segments, connecting cilia, and the first rudimentary outer segment structures were noted at P7. In the Crx-/- retina, only an occassional connecting cilium was noted emerging from inner segments at this stage (Figure 4A and 4B). This observation was confirmed by comparison with transmission electron micrographs (Figure 5). These differences are the earliest noted differences between Crx+/+ and Crx-/- photoreceptors. At P14, elongating outer segments were noted on Crx+/+ photoreceptors, occasionally demonstrating a paddle-like structure at their apex (Figure 4C, os). In Crx-/- retinae, the vast majority of photoreceptors at this stage demonstrated connecting cilia without outer segments (Figure 4D, cc). Sporadically, Crx-/- photoreceptors would exhibit an irregular structure extending from a connecting cilium (Figure 4D, cc*) perhaps representing a malformed outer segment. Such structures were also observed at P21 (Figure 4F, cc*). These putative, abnormal outer segments were only rarely noted in Crx+/+ at P14, and never at P21 (Figure 4C and 4E, cc*). Further, in Crx-/- photoreceptors, unusually long connecting cilia were noted (Figure 4F, cc). Serial examination of Crx-/- photoreceptors at P7, P10, P14, and P21 by TEM, demonstrated a distinctive lack of any structure interpretable as orderly stacks of discs or forming discs. These data demonstrate a complete absence of normal outer segment formation in the Crx mutant mouse, and the arrest of development of the photoreceptor appendage at the elongation stage of outer segment formation.

Figure 4

Outer segment morphogenesis in Crx-/- photoreceptors. Scanning electron microscopy of developing photoreceptors viewed from the scleral side with the pigmented epithelium removed at P7, P14, and P21 for Crx+/+ (A, C, and E) and Crx-/- (B, D, F) littermates. In Crx+/+ retina, numerous connecting cilia (A, cc) were evident at P7 with rudimentary outer segments. After P7, in Crx+/+ outer segment elongation occurs. Initially, outer segments have a paddle-like structure (C, os) which is later shed (E, os). In Crx-/- photoreceptors, few connecting cilia were observed at P7 (B, cc). After P7, connecting cilia were more numerous and occasionally a malformed outer segment was noted extending from a connecting cilium (D and F, cc*). These were rarely observed in Crx+/+ and only at P14 (C, cc*). At P21, abnormally long connecting cilia are noted in Crx-/- (F, cc). Scale bars = 10 μm

Figure 5

Transmission electron micrographs of Crx-/- photoreceptors in the photoreceptor layer at P7. (A) Photoreceptor layer of Crx+/+ retina demonstrating nascent outer segment structures (arrow) emerging from photoreceptor connecting cilia (cc). (B) Crx-/- photoreceptors exhibited connecting cilia (cc) at this early stage, however, nascent outer segment structures were not observed. Scale Bar = 1 μm.

Finally, the morphology of the malformed Crx-/- photoreceptors was compared to rhodopsin-/- and peripherin-/- photoreceptors. Rhodopsin and peripherin are two photoreceptor-specific genes whose expression is significantly downregulated in the Crx-/- retinae [10,34,35]. Loss of function mutations in each of these genes separately have been reported to result in a failure to elaborate outer segments [29,30]. Photoreceptors from these two mutant mice examined by SEM from the scleral side appeared highly similar to Crx-/- photoreceptors (compare Figure 4F to Figure 6A and 6B).

Figure 6

Scanning electron microscopy of peripherin-/- (A) and rhodopsin-/- (B) photoreceptors at P21, viewed from the scleral side with the pigmented epithelium removed. cc, connecting cilium. is, inner segment. Scale bar = 10 μm.

Crx is necessary for the formation of photoreceptor terminals

In a previous study, we demonstrated that forced expression of a dominant-negative allele of Crx in developing rods blocked formation of both rod spherules in the outer plexiform layer (OPL) and outer segments [7]. To expand on these studies, the ultrastructure of photoreceptor synapses was examined in Crx-/- retinas. In Crx+/+ retinas at P21, newly mature rod spherules were abundant (Figure 7A). The sperules were blunt or club-shaped structures with a single ribbon associated with a single invaginating synapse (Figure 7A, arrow indicates one example; Figure 8A and 8B). Two processes from horizontal cells were situated on either side of the synaptic ridge (Figure 8B, labelled H) and one or more dendrites of rod bipolar cells occupied a central position (Figure 8B, bipolar labelled B). Cone terminals are large, flat pedicles that exhibit many invaginating synapses containing separate sets of horizontal and bipolar cell processes. Each pedicle contains numerous ribbons. These terminals were much less common than spherules in Crx+/+ retinas at P21 (Figure 7, box). In the OPL of Crx-/- retinas, photoreceptor terminals were highly disorganized at P21 (Figure 7B, arrows). Processes containing synaptic vesicles and ribbon-like structures were apparent, suggesting at least limited generation of synapse components. However, well formed spherules and pedicles were not observed. In addition, many terminals appeared to contain multiple ribbons (Figure 8C and 8D, r) not tethered to the plasma membrane and occasionally in perinuclear positions (Figure 8D).

Figure 7

Transmission electron micrographs of the outer plexiform layer in Crx-/- retinas. (A) In Crx+/+ retina at P21, newly formed rod spherules were abundant (arrow demonstrates one example). The spherules were club-shaped and contained a single invaginating synapse with one ribbon complex. Cone terminals form large, flat pedicles that contain many invaginating synapses with separate ribbon structures. These terminals were more scarce, but apparent in Crx+/+ retinas at P21 (one example in box). (B) In the outer plexiform layer (OPL) of Crx-/- retinas, photoreceptor terminals appeared highly disorganized at P21 (arrows). Well-formed pedicles and spherules were not evident. Putative terminals containing ribbon-like structures were apparent, suggesting at least limited generation of synapse components. Many terminals appeared to contain multiple ribbon-like structures, instead of a singule ribbon. For example, terminal 1 and 2 contained two ribbons each, whereas terminal 3 appeared to contain only one. opl, outer plexiform layer. Scale bar = 2 μm.

Figure 8

Transmission electron micrographs of the outer plexiform layer in Crx-/- retinas at P21. (A) Crx+/+ rod spherules contained a single invaginating synapse with one ribbon complex. The spherule was a blunt or club-shaped structure. (B) Crx+/+ rod terminals contained a single ribbon structure (r). Two processes, from horizontal cells (h), contacted the rod laterally. An additional process, the postsynaptic bipolar dendrite (b), was situated more centrally. Terminals were filled with synaptic vesicles. One coated vesicle originatinf from the cell membrane was observed (arrow). (C) In the OPL of Crx-/- retinas, photoreceptor terminals appeared highly disorganized. Putative terminals containing synaptic vesicles and ribbon-like structures were apparent (arrows), suggesting at least limited generation of synapse components. However, well formed spherules and pedicles were not observed. Further, many terminals appeared to contain multiple ribbon-like structures (r). The majority of these ribbons were not associated with the synaptic membrane, but instead were found free floating and, in some instances, were perinuclear (D, arrow). H, horizontal cell; B, bipolar cell; N, nucleus; r, ribbon. (A) Scale bar = 500 nm, (B) Scale bar = 250 nm, (C and D) Scale bar = 500 nm.

Discussion

In this study, an ultrastructural analysis of Crx-/- photoreceptors was carried out. As Crx mutations have been associated with Leber's congenital amaurosis, the findings in this study broaden our understanding of the pathology of this disease. Two prominent pathologies were characterized in the Crx-/- retina: (1) An absolute block in outer segment morphogenesis was noted, with the block occuring at the elongation stage of outer segment formation; (2) Crx-/- photoreceptors exhibited a severe perturbation in synapse formation. This represents the first report of a synaptogenesis defect in an animal model of LCA.

Crx-/- photoreceptors cannot complete outer segment morphogenesis

Mutations in Crx represent one of a collection of gene mutations that lead to an outer segment formation defect. Homozygous null mutations in the peripherin/RDS gene [36] or in rhodopsin [29] lead to a failure of outer segment formation. The deficits in peripherin-/- and Crx-/- photoreceptor morphogenesis were found to be very similar. Vesicular structures in Crx-/- photoreceptors were observed that were similar to those previously noted in the rds/peripherin-/- mouse. It was initially proposed that these vesicles were due to the breakdown of outer segment membranes that were not properly recruited to the outer segments in the absence of peripherin, or were from the result of the breakdown of the microvilli of Müller cells [30]. Strong support in favor of the former explanation was provided by Nir and colleagues who demonstrated the presence of rhodopsin protein in these vesicles using immunoelectron microscopy against a rhodopsin epitope [37]. Further, as shown here, the vesicles appear to bud from the inner segments themselves.

In developing photoreceptors, an extraordinary growth process occurs whereby the outer segment is generated from the nascent connecting cilium (see [38] and references therein). Peripherin/RDS and ROM-1 proteins (localized in disc rims) and the opsin proteins (localized throughout the discs) have important roles in the structural integrity of mature outer segments (see [39,29]). ROM-1-/- mice produce disorganized outer segments with large disks [40]. Crx, by virtue of being a transcription factor, presumably controls genes that are responsible for the building and perhaps maintenance of the outer segment structure, including rhodopsin and peripherin. Using northern blots [34], microarrays [10], and serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) [35], we have defined a large number of genes that are altered in their expression level in Crx-/- mice. We found that rhodopsin expression was severely diminished in Crx-/- animals, and peripherin mRNA was reduced by approximately 30%. Transgenic mice with variable levels of expression of wild type rhodopsin exhibit rod degeneration [41], indicating the importance of the level of rhodopsin expression. In addition, the timing of rhodopsin expression may be very important, as indicated by studies in Drosophila.

In Drosophila, rhodopsin (ninaE) is expressed in photoreceptors R1–R6. In ninaE null mutants, the rhabdomere, a structure analogous to vertebrate outer segments, fails to develop in R1–R6 photoreceptors [42], reminiscent of the situation in rhodopsin-/- mice [29]. An intriguing experiment by Kumar et al. [43] demonstrated a temporal requirement for rhodopsin expression during rhabdomere development. In ninaE null flies, a ninaE transgene under the control of a heat shock promoter was subjected to various temperature shifts during development. Heat shock during the normal time of rhodopsin onset resulted in substantial and long-lasting rescue of photoreceptor structure and transient rescue of photoreceptor physiology. However, expression shortly before or after this critical period failed to rescue, suggesting that rhodopsin expression during a discrete window of time in development is essential for proper rhabdomere morphogenesis. This result is consistent with observations in the rat wherein rhodopsin onset occurs with strict timing in the developmental history of most rods in vivo [44]. Thus, through its regulation of rhodopsin levels, or perhaps through control of the kinetics of the up-regulation of rhodopsin beginning at about P6, Crx may be regulating outer segment morphogenesis. The similarty of the two cases may extend further. At present, the closest Crx relative in Drosophila is Otd, the founding member of the class of homeobox genes to which Crx belongs. Interestingly, in one hypomorphic allele of Drosophila otd, otduvi, photoreceptor morphogenesis is also disrupted [45].

We found that there are many other genes that are dependent upon Crx. Those that are expressed at a lower level in the Crx-/- retina, such as rhodopsin and peripherin, comprise many that are either enriched or specific to photoreceptors in their expression [35]. They include enzymes that are important in lipid metabolism, protein folding and transport, as well as in other processes that one might envision would be important in building a structure such as the outer segment. In situ hybridization using probes from this collection of genes has revealed that some of them have their RNA localized to the inner segment, a finding typical for proteins targeted to the outer segment. Future analyses of the function of these genes might reveal their role in outer segment biogenesis.

Finally, polarization of photoreceptors was found to be largely intact, as was ciliogenesis. Another LCA gene, CRB1, and a related gene CRB3, have been implicated in ciliogenesis in in vitro models [46]. The Drosophila homologue of CRB1, Crumbs, has been implicated in photoreceptor morphogenesis [47]. However, the spontaneously occurring mouse mutant in CRB1, the Rd8 mouse, develops shortened outer segments that subsequently degenerate [48], suggesting that photoreceptor polarization and synaptogenesis are intact in this mutant. While CRB1 and Crx have been both linked to LCA, further work is necessary to determine if their function is linked in retinal development.

Synaptogenesis is perturbed in Crx-/- photoreceptors

The Crx-/- mouse demonstrates the most severe abnormality of photoreceptor synapses reported to date. The peripherin-/- mouse develops a normal complement of photoreceptor terminals which then degenerate as the photoreceptors are lost [30]. Also, similarly in rhodopsin (Rho) and cyclic nucleotide-gated channel, alpha-3 (CNGA3) double knockout mice (Rho-/-, CNGA3-/-), synapses are reported to form normally [49]. These observations demonstrate that photoreceptor synaptogenesis can occur in the absence of outer segment formation. In keeping with this observation is the fact that some electroretinogram activity is present in peripherin-/- mice, suggesting that minimal phototransduction is present in these mice, enough to drive activity at the photoreceptor synapse. In vitro studies wherein synapse elements are formed in the absence of proper outer segment development and, therefore, possible absence of light-dependent photoreceptor activity, have indicated the independence of phototransduction and synapse formation, at least for the initial stages [50,51]. These data then suggest that the fact that the Crx-/- photoreceptors do not have proper synaptic endings is not due to a lack of outer segment formation. A more likely explanation is that Crx plays a role in photoreceptor synapse formation, perhaps by regulating directly, or indirectly, important genes in this process. Using immunohistochemistry, we examined the expression of common pre-synaptic terminal proteins, including KIF3a, SV2, and synaptophysin, and were unable to observe qualitative differences between Crx-/- and control tissue at P14 (data not shown). Examination of their RNA levels by SAGE showed no significant difference for all 3 genes, though very few tags were recovered from these genes and thus the analysis of RNA levels may not be significant [35]. However, since other genes expressed in photoreceptors were significantly altered in their expression level in the Crx-/- mouse, there are many candidates that could be important for photoreceptor morphogenesis. Tags from three genes from proteins expressed in photoreceptor terminals were found to be decreased in a statistically significant fashion, namely the HGF-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate, the CRIPT protein, and synaptotagmin 1 (Blackshaw and Cepko, unpublished data). An example of a gene that was increased in the Crx-/- retina is HRG4 (a homologue of the C. elegans Unc119 gene) (Blackshaw and Cepko, unpublished data) which encodes a component of the ribbon synapse [33]. The fact that it is upregulated might indicate a response to the lack of proper terminal structures. Several other genes encoding putative cytoskeletal elements also were increased (e.g. microtubule associated protein 4) or decreased (e.g. cofilin 1) in the Crx-/- retina, with P values of <.005. It is not known whether any of these genes are involved in building or regulating synaptic structures, but they are now genes that might lead to a better understanding of the construction and function of the relatively unique structure of the ribbon synapse.

Abnormal photoreceptor terminal formation was noted in a study that examined retinal development in the laminin beta2 chain-deficient mouse [52]. Several pathologies were noted in these mice. First, laminin beta2 chain-deficient mice displayed abnormal outer segment elongation, but a more mild phenotype than that of the Crx-/- mice; the outer segments were reduced by 50% in length. Also photoreceptor terminals were perturbed in laminin beta2 mutants, but again the phenotype was more subtle then that of Crx-/- mice. The outer plexiform layer of the beta2-deficient retinas demonstrated only 7% normal invaginating synapses, while the remainder had various pathologies, including floating synaptic ribbons, as seen here. The mechanistic relationship of these two molecules, if any, in photoreceptor morphogenesis is unknown to date. The mRNA for laminin beta2 was not detected in the SAGE study of the relative RNA levels in Crx-/- and Crx+/+ and thus we cannot comment on whether the levels of RNA for laminin beta2 were altered.

Crx-/- mice are a model for LCA

Crx has been implicated in three photoreceptor diseases that result in human blindness, cone-rod dystrophy2, Leber's congenital amaurosis, and retinitis pigmentosa (for review, see [53]). The cone-rod dystrophies (CRDs) are characterized by loss of cone-mediated vision in the first decade of life or later, with concomitant or subsequent loss of rod-mediated vision [54]. Conversely, RP is notable for initial loss of rod function, followed by loss of cone-mediated vision [55]. The majority of known genes responsible for human genetic blindness, encode proteins expressed almost exclusively, or exclusively, in photoreceptors, particularly in the outer segment [35]. Many of these proteins are required for phototransduction or outer segment structure. The mechanisms whereby mutations in rod-specific genes, such as rhodopsin, lead eventually to cone degeneration in RP remain obscure. Mutations in Crx were the first, and still one of a very few examples of a transcription factor mutation leading to photoreceptor disease.

LCA is a disease in which there is little or no photoreceptor function in infancy; thereby, likely developmental in etiology ([17,56] for review). The Crx-/- mouse may be an excellent model for studying the pathology of this disorder, particularly the subtype of the disorder where Crx mutations are involved. The vast majority of histopathological studies of LCA in human tissue have been derived from adult patients with LCA where secondary changes are likely to be present. Indeed in animal models of LCA, secondary reactive and/or degenerative changes occur early after the abnormal formation of retinal tissue [57]. The only study in human tissue derived from a human 33-week retina with proposed RPE65 mutations was reported to have abnormal retinae at this early stage [24]. These authors report cell loss, including thinning of the photoreceptor layer. In addition, they claim in the text to have seen aberrant synaptic and inner retinal organization, although their examination of photoreceptor synapses unfortunately are not presented in the data section of the paper. Given the scarcity of available human tissue, the characterization of the primary pathology of LCA will require animal models. In the current study, we present data that argue that, in addition to outer segment morphogenesis, synaptogenesis may also be critically impaired in at least a subset of LCA.

Methods

Mice

Crx-/- mice were generated as reported elsewhere [34]. Rhodosin-null mice [29] were obtained from Paul Sieving (University of Michigan). Rds mice were acquired from Jackson Laboratory.

Transmission electron microscopy

Littermate Crx-/- and wildtype pups were perfused in 1% formaldehyde and 0.5% glutaraldehyde at various postnatal stages. The eyes were then enucleated, and the cornea and lens were removed. The eye cup was immersed in fixative (1% formaldehyde and 2.5% glutaraldehyde) for 3 to 4 hours at 4°C. The sclera was then partially removed and the retinas were sliced into small pieces and fixed (1% paraformaldehyde and 2.5% glutaraldehyde) overnight at 4°C. These procedures were found optimal for maintaining the structural integrity of the photoreceptor outer segments.

After fixing, the tissue was washed 2X in PBS for thirty minutes per wash. The tissue was then postfixed in a 1% osmium tetroxide/1.5% potassium ferrocyanide mixture for 2 hours at 4°C. Staining was carried out for 30 minutes in 1% uranyl acetate in maleate buffer (pH = 6.0) at room temperature followed by 1% tannic acid in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer (pH = 7.4) for thirty minutes. The specimens were then dehydrated and embedded in Epon/Araldite. Thin sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and examined in a Jeol JEM-1200EX electron microscope.

Scanning electron microscopy

Specimens used for SEM required removal of the retinal pigment epithelium (PE), enabling visualization of the outer surface of the neural retina. Retinae from Crx-/-, rhodopsin-/-, RDS, or wildtype eyes were dissected free from PE in a dispase solution and fixed in 1.25% glutaraldehyde and 1.0% formaldehyde overnight at 4°C. Tissue was then washed 5X in cacodylate buffer and dehydrated in ascending grades of ethanol. Tissues were subsequently critical point dried in carbon dioxide. All specimens were mounted and coated with sublimated gold-palladium by the sputtering technique. Micrographs were obtained with a Jeol JSM-35CF scanning electron microscope.

Authors' contributions

EM and ER conducted transmission electron microscopy. EM performed scanning electron microscopy. TF and EM generated, characterized and maintained the Crx-/- mouse line. CC participated in the design and coordination of the study and all data analysis. EM and CC drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Heather Regan and Dr. Susumu Ito for helping with ultrastructural analyses and Dr. David Papermaster for helpful discussions on the formation of outer segments.PGC-1α Deficiency Causes Multi-System Energy Metabolic Derangements: Muscle Dysfunction, Abnormal Weight Control and Hepatic Steatosis

Abstract

The gene encoding the transcriptional coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator-1α (PGC-1α) was targeted in mice. PGC-1α null (PGC-1α−/−) mice were viable. However, extensive phenotyping revealed multi-system abnormalities indicative of an abnormal energy metabolic phenotype. The postnatal growth of heart and slow-twitch skeletal muscle, organs with high mitochondrial energy demands, is blunted in PGC-1α−/− mice. With age, the PGC-1α−/− mice develop abnormally increased body fat, a phenotype that is more severe in females. Mitochondrial number and respiratory capacity is diminished in slow-twitch skeletal muscle of PGC-1α−/− mice, leading to reduced muscle performance and exercise capacity. PGC-1α−/− mice exhibit a modest diminution in cardiac function related largely to abnormal control of heart rate. The PGC-1α−/− mice were unable to maintain core body temperature following exposure to cold, consistent with an altered thermogenic response. Following short-term starvation, PGC-1α−/− mice develop hepatic steatosis due to a combination of reduced mitochondrial respiratory capacity and an increased expression of lipogenic genes. Surprisingly, PGC-1α−/− mice were less susceptible to diet-induced insulin resistance than wild-type controls. Lastly, vacuolar lesions were detected in the central nervous system of PGC-1α−/− mice. These results demonstrate that PGC-1α is necessary for appropriate adaptation to the metabolic and physiologic stressors of postnatal life.

Introduction

Mitochondrial functional capacity is dynamically regulated to meet the diverse energy demands imposed on the mammalian organism following birth. Postnatal mitochondrial biogenesis involves multiple signaling and transcriptional regulatory pathways that control the coordinate expression of nuclear and mitochondrial genes involved in mitochondrial structure, metabolism, and proliferation [1]. Recent evidence points toward a transcriptional coactivator, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARγ) coactivator-1α (PGC-1α), as an integrator of the molecular regulatory circuitry involved in the transcriptional control of cellular energy metabolism, including mitochondrial function and biogenesis [1,2]. PGC-1α was discovered in a yeast two-hybrid screen for brown adipose-specific factors that interact with the adipogenic nuclear receptor PPARγ [2]. Subsequently, two additional PGC-1 family members were identified, PGC-1 related coactivator (PRC) [3] and PGC-1β [4,5]. PGC-1α serves as a direct transcriptional coactivator of nuclear and nonnuclear receptor transcription factors involved in cellular energy metabolism [6]. PGC-1α is distinct among most coactivators in that it exhibits a tissue-enriched expression pattern and is highly inducible by physiologic conditions known to increase the demand for mitochondrial ATP or heat production [2,6,7]. PGC-1α is enriched in brown adipose tissue (BAT), heart, slow-twitch skeletal muscle, and kidney—all tissues with high-capacity mitochondrial systems. The expression of the gene encoding PGC-1α is rapidly induced by cold exposure, short-term exercise, and fasting [2,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15]. These latter observations suggest that PGC-1α is involved in the physiologic control of energy metabolism.

Several lines of evidence, based on the results of overexpression studies, indicate that PGC-1α is sufficient to promote mitochondrial biogenesis and regulate mitochondrial respiratory capacity. First, PGC-1α activates the transcription of mitochondrial uncoupling protein-1 (UCP-1) in BAT through interactions with the nuclear hormone receptors PPARγ and thyroid receptor [2]. Second, forced expression studies in adipogenic and myogenic mammalian cell lines demonstrated that PGC-1α activates mitochondrial biogenesis through a group of transcription factor targets including nuclear respiratory factors 1 and 2 (NRF-1 and -2) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), key transcriptional regulators of mitochondrial DNA transcription and replication [8]. Third, studies in primary cardiac myocytes in culture and in the hearts of transgenic mice have demonstrated that overexpression of PGC-1α promotes mitochondrial biogenesis [10,16]. Lastly, forced expression of PGC-1α in skeletal muscle of transgenic mice triggers mitochondrial proliferation and the formation of mitochondrial-rich type I, oxidative (“slow-twitch”) muscle fibers [17]. Collectively, these results indicate that PGC-1α is sufficient to drive mitochondrial biogenesis.

Recent evidence also implicates PGC-1α in the homeostatic control of systemic energy metabolism. PGC-1α has been shown to regulate several key hepatic gluconeogenic genes [18,19,20,21]. Recent studies have also shown altered expression of PGC-1α and downstream mitochondrial target pathways in skeletal muscle of humans with insulin resistance and diabetes [22,23,24]. In addition, single nucleotide polymorphisms within the human PGC-1α gene have been shown to be associated with obesity, hypertension, and diabetes [25,26,27,28,29,30].

The gain-of-function studies described to date provide compelling evidence that PGC-1α is capable of regulating postnatal energy metabolism. However, the necessity of PGC-1α for energy metabolic homeostasis, mitochondrial biogenesis, development, and growth can only be addressed using loss-of-function strategies. To this end, we have established and characterized mice with targeted deletion of the PGC-1α gene. Our studies of PGC-1α−/− mice demonstrate that PGC-1α is not absolutely required for prenatal viability including mitochondrial biogenesis. However, our findings indicate that the coactivator PGC-1α serves a critical role in the normal metabolic function of multiple organs and for appropriate adaptation to physiologic stress during postnatal life.

Results

Disruption of the PGC-1α Gene in Mice

A neomycin-based gene targeting vector was generated to delete exons 4 and 5 of the murine PGC-1α gene. The targeting event resulted in a 3′ homologous recombination with insertion of the remainder of the construct (Figure 1A). The insertion/recombination event was confirmed by Southern blotting and DNA sequencing. The insertion caused an exon 3 duplication between exons 5 and 6 that creates a coding region frameshift resulting in a premature termination at amino acid 255. Germline transmission of the mutant allele was confirmed using Southern blotting (Figure 1B) and PCR (unpublished data). The PGC-1α gene disruption resulted in an unstable transcript that could not be detected by RNA blot analysis in heart and other tissues in PGC-1α−/− mice (Figure 1C and unpublished data). Quantitative RT-PCR was utilized to further evaluate the efficacy of the gene targeting. For these studies, PCR primers were designed to amplify a region of the PGC-1α gene transcript containing the exon 5–6 border (predicted to be absent in PGC-1α−/− mice) or the exon 5–3 border (predicted to be present only in the PGC-1α−/− mice). The exon 5–6 amplicon was detected in heart and BAT of wild-type (WT) but not PGC-1α−/− mice (Figure 1D). Conversely, the exon 5–3 product was present only in PGC-1α−/− mice (Figure 1D). An exon 10–11 border amplicon (predicted to be present in both genotypes) was detected in WT and PGC-1α−/− mice, but was greatly diminished in the PGC-1α−/− mice, indicating that the mutant transcript is unstable. PGC-1α protein was not detected in whole cell (Figure 1E) or nuclear protein extracts (unpublished data) isolated from BAT of PGC-1α−/− mice under basal conditions or in response to cold exposure, a condition known to markedly induce the expression of PGC-1α in BAT. Smaller mutant PGC-1α proteins were also not detected by Western blot analysis (unpublished data). Lastly, expression of the genes encoding the other known PGC-1 family members, PGC-1β and PRC, was not significantly altered in heart of PGC-1α−/− mice (Figure 1C). Taken together, these results support the conclusion that the gene targeting event resulted in a PGC-1α null allele.

General Characteristics of the PGC-1α−/− Mice: Age- and Sex-Dependent Obesity

Heterozygous (PGC-1α+/−) mice were bred to generate PGC-1α−/− offspring. The observed genotype ratios of the offspring were consistent with the expected Mendelian ratios (unpublished data). Unexpected deaths of the offspring were not observed, and PGC-1α+/− and PGC-1α−/− offspring appeared normal. Total body weights obtained 1 wk after birth revealed a 15%–20% reduction in total body mass for male and female PGC-1α−/− mice relative to sex-matched PGC-1α+/+ littermates (Figure 2). The weight decrement between PGC-1α−/− and PGC-1α+/+ littermates disappeared by 3 wk of age (Figure 2A). At 18 wk of age, body weight was modestly but significantly greater in male and female PGC-1α−/− mice compared to sex-matched PGC-1α+/+ controls (Figure 2A). This weight difference was also significant for female PGC-1α−/− mice at 24 wk of age (Figure 2A). The abnormal weight gain in PGC-1α−/− mice was not associated with differences in food intake (unpublished data) or alterations in general activity as monitored for 48 h (Figure S1). Percent body fat, as determined by dual-energy X-ray absorption (DEXA), was greater in 18- and 24-wk-old female PGC-1α−/− mice compared to age-matched female PGC-1α+/+ counterparts, indicating that the body weight difference was due, at least in part, to increased body fat (Figure 2A). Lean mass was not significantly different between the genotypes (unpublished data). Although DEXA did not detect excess body fat in male PGC-1α−/− mice at 18 or 24 wk of age, older male mutant mice (over 7 mo of age) accumulated more body fat than male WT controls (Figure 2A and unpublished data).

Individual organ weights were assessed, given the importance of mitochondrial energy metabolism for postnatal growth in certain organs. The weights of heart and slow-twitch fiber-enriched skeletal muscles, including gastrocnemius and soleus, but not the less oxidative tibialis anterior, were significantly lower in male and female PGC-1α−/− mice compared with age and sex-matched PGC-1α+/+ controls at 3 and 8 wk of age (Figure 2B and unpublished data). In contrast, the weights of brain, liver, kidney, and BAT were not significantly different between the genotypes at the 3-wk time point (Figure 2B). Thus, certain tissues with high mitochondrial energy requirements, such as heart and slow-twitch skeletal muscle, exhibit modest growth defects in PGC-1α−/− mice.

Abnormal Muscle Mitochondrial Phenotype in PGC-1α−/− Mice

General histologic analyses were performed to begin to evaluate the mild growth defect found in postnatal heart and skeletal muscle of the PGC-1α−/− mice. There were no obvious abnormalities in cellularity, cell size, or extracellular matrix in the tissues of 1–2-mo-old PGC-1α−/− mice (unpublished data). Given the important role of PGC-1α in mitochondrial function and biogenesis, we examined mitochondrial ultrastructure in the relevant tissues. Electron microscopic analysis revealed fewer and smaller mitochondria in soleus muscle of PGC-1α−/− mice compared to sex- and age- matched PGC-1α+/+ controls (Figure 3A). Quantitative morphometry of the electron micrographs confirmed that the cellular volume density of soleus mitochondria was significantly lower in PGC-1α−/− mice compared to PGC-1α+/+ controls independent of changes in the myofibrillar component (Figure 3B). Consistent with a defect in mitochondrial biogenesis, we found a reduction in the expression of nuclear genes encoding proteins involved in mitochondrial electron transport (cytochrome c and cytochrome oxidase IV) and oxidative phosphorylation (beta subunit of ATP synthase) in soleus muscle of PGC-1α−/− mice compared with PGC-1α+/+ controls. In addition, the expression of Tfam, a known PGC-1α target involved in mitochondrial DNA replication/transcription, was diminished in PGC-1α−/− soleus, providing one potential mechanism for defective mitochondrial biogenesis (Figure 3C). In contrast to the results with soleus, no significant differences in mitochondrial ultrastructure or volume density were noted in heart or BAT of PGC-1α−/− mice (unpublished data).

To determine whether mitochondrial function was altered in the skeletal muscle of PGC-1α−/− mice, mitochondrial respiration rates were measured using tissue strips prepared from soleus muscle. In soleus of PGC-1α−/− mice, a significant defect in state 3 (ADP-stimulated) respiration, but not state 2 (basal), was detected using succinate as the substrate (Figure 3D). State 4 respiration rates (in the presence of oligomycin) were also similar between the genotypes, indicating that the coupling of respiration to ATP production was not significantly altered in PGC-1α−/− mice. These results are consistent with the modest but significant reduction in mitochondrial volume density.

Altered Skeletal Muscle Function in PGC-1α−/− Mice

The abnormality in mitochondrial number and respiratory function in skeletal muscle led us to further evaluate the skeletal muscle phenotype. As an initial step, we measured locomotor activity levels over a 1-h period using a high-resolution photobeam system. PGC-1α−/− male mice exhibited a significantly lower mean number of ambulations and rearings during the hour compared to the PGC-1α+/+ age-matched controls (Figure 4). However, an analysis of exploratory behavior showed that the PGC-1α−/− mice were reluctant to go into the center of the “field” compared to controls. Specifically, PGC-1α−/− mice made significantly fewer entries into, spent significantly less time in, and traveled a significantly shorter distance in the central area of the “field,” although differences in distance traveled in the peripheral zone of the “field” was not significantly different between groups (Figure S2). These data suggest that the general activity level may have been affected by the reluctance of the PGC-1α−/− mice to go into the central area of the field and thus remain in the periphery (thigmotaxis), possibly reflecting altered emotionality such as increased fear.

A battery of tests was performed to further evaluate the general sensorimotor phenotype of the PGC-1α−/− mice. No differences were found between PGC-1α−/− mice and PGC-1α+/+ controls on the ledge, platform, walking initiation, and 60° and 90° inclined screen tests (unpublished data), suggesting that several sensorimotor functions were intact in the PGC-1α−/− mice. However, the PGC-1α−/− mice were unable to remain on an inverted screen for as long as the PGC-1α+/+ controls (Figure 4A). Since the groups did not differ on the times it took to turn around and climb to the top of 60° and 90° inclined screens, the differences on the inverted screen test suggest that impaired strength rather than deficits in coordination were responsible for these differences.

To further evaluate the skeletal muscle phenotype, exercise capacity was assessed in the PGC-1α−/− mice. To this end, the PGC-1α−/− mice were exercised on a motorized treadmill apparatus using a run-to-exhaustion format. PGC-1α−/− mice (6–8 mo of age) exhibited a markedly reduced capacity to sustain running exercise (PGC-1α−/− mice, 64 ± 6 s; age-matched PGC-1α+/+ mice, 586 ± 104 s; Figure 4B). The same result was obtained with younger PGC-1α−/− mice, i.e., at 3.5 mo of age (unpublished data). To quantify aerobic exercise capacity, VO2max (maximum oxygen consumption, measured in milliliters of oxygen per kilogram of body weight per minute) was measured with the treadmill-running protocol using indirect calorimetry. VO2max was significantly lower for the PGC-1α−/− mice (120.9 ± 2.0 ml O2 · kg−1 · min−1) compared to PGC-1α+/+ controls (141.6 ± 2.1 ml O2 · kg−1 · min−1) (Figure 4B). To directly evaluate muscle fatigability, the force response to repetitive stimulation of isolated soleus muscle was determined. The capacity to generate force following a series of tetani is dependent upon mitochondrial ATP production. During the initial phase of the stimulation period, there was no difference in force generation in muscles isolated from PGC-1α−/− mice and PGC-1α+/+ controls. However, fatigue resistance index, defined as the percent of initial force generated following a 2-min series of fatiguing contractions, was significantly lower in the PGC-1α−/− mice (14.6 ± 1.5%) compared to PGC-1α+/+ controls (24.8 ± 2.9%) (Figure 4C). These results, together with the observed abnormalities in skeletal muscle mitochondrial structure and function, indicate that PGC-1α is necessary for functional adaptation of skeletal muscle to physiologic demands.

Functional Abnormalities in Hearts of PGC-1α−/− Mice

PGC-1α expression is enriched in heart, a tissue that relies heavily on mitochondrial energy metabolism to maintain pump function throughout the postnatal life of the mammalian organism. Echocardiographic screening studies of PGC-1α−/− mice at ages 4–6 mo did not reveal any significant differences in chamber sizes or ventricular function compared to WT controls (unpublished data). Cardiac functional and metabolic reserve was evaluated using exercise echocardiographic stress testing (EST). Given that the exercise capacity of PGC-1α−/− mice is diminished, a series of preliminary treadmill exercise studies were performed to define a reasonable exercise duration for run-to-exhaustion to be used as a target duration for the EST. Based on the results of these studies, an EST regimen was performed in which PGC-1α+/+ control animals were exercised for a duration of 60 s to match the predicted average for the PGC-1α−/− mice (ages 6–8 mo). Echocardiographic images were obtained immediately following 60 s of exercise for the PGC-1α+/+ controls or at the point of exhaustion for PGC-1α−/− mice (mean 60 ± 6.1 s, range 45–90 s). Echocardiographic-determined left ventricular fractional shortening and heart rate were monitored for the 10-min period immediately post exercise. The mean heart rate of the PGC-1α−/− mice exhibited an inappropriate decline during the post exercise period (Figure 5A). In addition, echocardiographically determined left ventricular fractional shortening was decreased in the PGC-1α−/− mice, but not the PGC-1α+/+ mice during the first 4 min of the post exercise period (Figure 5A).

The results of the EST did not distinguish between a primary cardiac abnormality versus effects secondary to the exhaustion caused by reduced exercise tolerance related to skeletal muscle dysfunction. To directly assess cardiac function, the hearts of PGC-1α−/− and PGC-1α+/+ mice were isolated and perfused in the working mode. Hearts isolated from PGC-1α−/− mice generated lower cardiac work (cardiac output multiplied by peak systolic pressure) compared to PGC-1α+/+ mice at identical loading conditions (Table 1). This reduction in cardiac work was due to a reduced cardiac output (Table 1). The relative contribution of heart rate and stroke volume to diminished cardiac output in the PGC-1α−/− mice could not be delineated, because both were decreased but neither to a significant degree (Table 1). To further distinguish between abnormalities in heart rate and ventricular function, in vivo hemodynamic response to the β1,α1-adrenergic-selective agonist dobutamine was evaluated using a miniaturized Millar catheter. The ventricular functional response to dobutamine was similar in PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice (Figure 5B, right graph). However, PGC-1α−/− mice exhibited a significantly blunted heart rate response to β-adrenergic stimulation (Figure 5B, left graph). Taken together with the EST, these results strongly suggest that the PGC-1α−/− hearts are unable to mount an appropriate chronotropic response to exercise and other physiologic stimuli that activate β-adrenergic input to the heart. However, our results did not reveal evidence for contractile dysfunction.

PGC-1α−/− Mice Exhibit an Abnormal Thermogenic Response

PGC-1α has been implicated as an inducible regulator of mitochondrial respiratory uncoupling, an important source of heat production in BAT [2]. To determine whether PGC-1α is necessary for an appropriate thermogenic response, PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice were subjected to cold exposure (4 °C) for a 5-h period while core body temperature was monitored. PGC-1α−/− mice exhibited a markedly abnormal drop in core temperature compared to the WT controls (Figure 6A). Specifically, the mean decline in core temperature was greater than 12 °C at the 5-h time point in PGC-1α−/− mice, compared to an approximately 3 °C decrement in PGC-1α+/+ controls. Although this thermogenic phenotype was consistently present in mice aged 28–37 d, it was absent in older mice (unpublished data).

The histologic appearance and neutral lipid stores of BAT were assessed as an initial step to characterize the thermogenic phenotype exhibited by PGC-1α−/− mice. Histologic and lipid quantification studies were performed. Electron microscopic analyses indicated that the mitochondrial ultrastructure was similar in BAT isolated from PGC-1α−/− and PGC-1α+/+ mice before and after cold exposure (unpublished data). In addition, levels of BAT triglyceride were similar between the two genotypes (unpublished data). UCP-1 is a cold-inducible protein involved in mitochondrial respiratory uncoupling to generate heat in BAT. UCP-1 gene transcription is known to be activated by PGC-1α [2]. Surprisingly, basal and cold-induced BAT UCP-1 mRNA levels were similar in PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice (Figure 6B). These results suggest that PGC-1α is not necessary for the induction of the expression of UCP-1 with cold exposure, and that other factors, such as reduced capacity for mitochondrial respiration, likely contribute to the abnormal thermogenic response in the PGC-1α−/− mice.

Thermogenesis in rodents related to mitochondrial uncoupling is under the control of β3-adrenergic receptor coupled signaling. Accordingly, the in vivo oxygen consumption response to β3-adrenergic stimulation was examined in PGC-1α−/− mice. For these experiments, VO2 (oxygen consumption) was measured following administration of the β3-agonist BRL 37344 using indirect calorimetry. VO2 was significantly increased in response to BRL 3744 in PGC-1α+/+ but not PGC-1α−/− mice (Figure 6C). These results indicate that the metabolic response of BAT to an acute stimulus such as cold and/or β3-adrenergic stimulation is altered in the PGC-1α null mice, likely related to reduced capacity for mitochondrial respiratory uncoupling.

Fasting-Induced Hepatic Steatosis in PGC-1α−/− Mice

Previous studies have implicated PGC-1α in several hepatic metabolic functions including fatty acid oxidation and gluconeogenesis [18,19,20,21]. Accordingly, the hepatic phenotype was evaluated under basal conditions and following a 24-h fast, a stimulus known to induce fatty acid oxidation and gluconeogenic rates in liver. Under basal fed conditions, the livers of the PGC-1α−/− mice appeared grossly normal and did not exhibit histologic abnormalities (unpublished data). However, following a 24 h-fast, the PGC-1α−/− mice exhibited marked hepatic steatosis as determined by gross inspection, oil red O staining, electron microscopy, and measurements of liver triglyceride (TAG) levels (Figure 7). There were no differences in plasma triglycerides or free fatty acids between the genotypes in fed or fasted states (unpublished data). To further investigate the mechanisms involved in the fasting-induced hepatic steatotic response, hepatocytes were isolated from PGC-1α−/− mice and WT controls. Oleate loading experiments revealed that the PGC-1α−/− hepatocytes accumulated neutral lipid to a significantly greater extent than the WT cells (Figure 8A). 3H-palmitate oxidation rates were significantly lower in PGC-1α−/− hepatocytes compared to PGC-1α+/+ hepatocytes under basal conditions and following exposure to oleate (Figure 8B). Taken together, these latter results indicate a cell-autonomous defect in PGC-1α−/− hepatocytes that results in an inability to maintain cellular lipid balance in the context of increased delivery of lipid such as occurs with fasting.

PPAR, a known regulator of hepatic mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation enzyme gene expression, is a target for coactivation by PGC-1α [31]. Therefore, we sought to determine whether the steatotic phenotype of the PGC-1α−/− mice related to reduced expression of PPAR target genes. To this end, a survey of candidate genes and gene expression profiling experiments were performed. Surprisingly, the hepatic expression of PPAR target genes involved in cellular fatty acid and oxidation (MCPT and MCAD) were not significantly different between the genotypes under fed or fasted conditions (Table 2). Next, we performed experiments to determine whether the reduced capacity for fat oxidation in the hepatocytes of the PGC-1α−/− mice was related to altered mitochondrial respiratory function. Compared to the WT controls, PGC-1α−/− hepatocytes exhibited a modest but significant reduction in both state 2 and state 3 respiration rates (Figure 8C). These results identify one potential mechanism responsible for the fasting-induced hepatic steatosis: reduced capacity for fat oxidation due to mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction.

Although the liver gene expression profiling studies did not reveal abnormalities in the fatty acid oxidation pathway in the PGC-1α−/− mice, several interesting differences in the activity of the sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c) pathway were noted. Specifically, the fasting-mediated down-regulation of SREBP-1c and its target gene stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD1), was abolished in PGC-1α−/− mice (Table 2). Furthermore, expression of the gene encoding diglyceride acyltransferase (DGAT), which catalyzes the last step in TAG synthesis, was activated at baseline and induced by fasting to a greater level in PGC-1α−/− mice (Table 2). These results suggest that, in addition to a defect in oxidation, components of the TAG synthesis pathway are activated in the PGC-1α−/− mice. To evaluate this possibility directly, rates of 3H-glycerol incorporation into TAG were determined in isolated hepatocytes. 3H-TAG incorporation was increased nearly 50% in hepatocytes isolated from PGC-1α−/− mice compared to PGC-1α+/+ controls (Figure 8D), confirming that TAG synthesis rates are increased in PGC-1α null hepatocytes, identifying a second potential mechanism contributing to the fasting-induced hepatic steatosis.

Despite a Mild Obese Phenotype, Female PGC-1α−/− Mice Do Not Exhibit Insulin Resistance

Recent studies have suggested that specific PGC-1α single nucleotide polymorphisms and haplotypes may influence the development of insulin resistance and diabetes [27,30] and that PGC-1 activity is diminished in insulin-resistant and diabetic muscle [22,23]. Accordingly, peripheral glucose disposal and insulin responsiveness were examined in PGC-1α−/− mice. Glucose tolerance testing of 2-mo-old male and female mice revealed no significant difference in blood glucose excursion between PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− groups (unpublished data). Given that older female PGC-1α−/− mice develop an increase in body fat stores, glucose tolerance and insulin responsiveness were further evaluated in this group. Glucose tolerance testing in 4.5-mo-old female PGC-1α−/− mice revealed that, despite increased body weight [mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) weight of PGC-1α+/+ mice = 22.4 ± 0.79 g; PGC-1α−/− mice = 25.2 ± 1.04 g), PGC-1α−/− mice exhibited similar levels of glucose tolerance compared to WT mice on standard rodent chow (Figure 9). To examine glucose homeostasis in response to high-fat diet, female PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice were placed on high-fat chow (43% calories from fat) for 6 wk starting at 8 wk of age. The weight gained on the high-fat diet was similar for the PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− groups (Figure S3). Surprisingly, the PGC-1α−/− mice on a high-fat diet were significantly more glucose-tolerant and insulin-sensitive compared to the PGC-1α+/+ mice (Figure 9B). Taken together, these results indicate that, despite excess body fat under standard conditions, the female PGC-1α−/− mice do not exhibit insulin resistance. Moreover, the PGC-1α−/− mice are more glucose-tolerant and insulin-sensitive than WT mice on a high-fat diet.

Structural Abnormalities of the Central Nervous System in PGC-1α−/− Mice

In surveying the tissues of the PGC-1α−/− mice, structural abnormalities of the brain were observed. Light microscopic examination of PGC-1α−/− brain tissue samples demonstrated a well-preserved cerebral cortical neuronal complement, a result confirmed by measurement of neuron density in sections of the parietal lobe (PGC-1α+/+, 1,261 ± 91 neurons/mm2 versus PGC-1α−/−, 1,299 ± 82 neurons/mm2; not significant). Patchy areas of microvacuolation involving the neuropil and individual pyramidal neurons of the deep layers of the cerebral cortex were noted in the PGC-1α−/− mice but not the PGC-1α+/+ mice (Figure 10A). Immunolocalization of an astrocytic marker, glial fibrillary acidic protein, failed to show an increase in numbers of astrocytic processes in PGC-1α−/− mouse cerebral cortex (unpublished data). The hippocampus also showed neuronal microvacuolation, albeit to a lesser degree than the parietal cortex. Microvacuolation of the neuropil and neurons of the PGC-1α−/− basal ganglia (caudate and putamen) was also noted in association with a patchy increase in the number and intensity of glial fibrillary acidic protein-immunoreactive astrocytic processes (unpublished data). Areas of microvacuolation also involved multiple brainstem regions. Only rare vacuolated Purkinje and granule cell neurons were identified in the PGC-1α−/− cerebellar cortex. Neither microglial proliferation nor perivascular lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrates were noted in the PGC-1α−/− CNS.

Ultrastructural examination of the PGC-1α−/− parietal cerebral cortex confirmed the presence of microvacuolated neurons and neuropil (Figure 10B). Vacuoles containing aggregates of membranous material were present in a subset of cortical neurons. Subcellular localization of the vacuoles was difficult to establish; some may represent vacuolated elements of the neuropil, material in phagocytic cells, presynaptic nerve terminals compressing the soma, or genuine intraperikaryal deposits.

Discussion

Previous studies using gain-of-function strategies have shown that the coactivator PGC-1α is capable of coactivating an array of transcription factors involved in energy metabolic processes including fatty acid oxidation, electron transport, and oxidative phosphorylation [6]. Forced expression of PGC-1α triggers mitochondrial biogenesis by activating a complex circuitry of factors including NRF-1, NRF-2, and the orphan nuclear receptor estrogen-related receptor α [23,32]. However, gain-of-function strategies cannot determine whether PGC-1α is essential for critical energy metabolic processes including mitochondrial biogenesis and function. Using targeted gene deletion in mice, we show here that PGC-1α is not essential for normal embryologic development or the fundamental events of mitochondrial biogenesis. However, several lines of evidence support the conclusion that PGC-1α is necessary for the programs that regulate postnatal mitochondrial function and cellular energy metabolism, processes that equip the organism for the energy metabolic rigors of the postnatal environment. First, mitochondrial volume density is diminished in slow-twitch skeletal muscle of PGC-1α−/− mice. Second, mitochondrial respiratory capacity is modestly but significantly altered in skeletal muscle and liver of PGC-1α−/− mice. Third, the growth of heart and soleus muscle, tissues with high reliance on mitochondrial energy production, is blunted. Fourth, control of body fat mass is abnormal in the PGC-1α−/− mice. Finally, PGC-1α−/− mice do not respond normally to a variety of physiologic and dietary stresses known to increase oxidative energy demands. Taken together, these results strongly suggest that PGC-1α is necessary for the terminal stages of mitochondrial maturation necessary to meet the energy demands of the postnatal environment.

Extensive phenotypic analyses demonstrated that mice lacking PGC-1α are unable to cope with physiologic stressors relevant to postnatal survival. For example, a skeletal muscle phenotype was unveiled in PGC-1α−/− mice under conditions in which energy supply becomes limiting. This was most clearly demonstrated by the profound abnormalities exhibited by PGC-1α−/− mice with exercise-to-exhaustion and repetitive muscle stimulation studies. Similarly, cardiac performance of PGC-1α−/− mice was compromised following severe exertion. This effect was largely due to an abnormal heart rate response. The basis for the observed abnormalities of cardiac heart rate, including a blunted response to β-adrenergic stimulation, is unknown, but could be related to the effects of late-stage growth arrest and corresponding derangements in energy metabolism on sinus node function. PGC-1α was first identified as a coactivator in BAT [2]. Indeed, we found that exposure of the PGC-1α−/− mice to cold, another relevant physiologic stress, resulted in an untoward drop in core body temperature consistent with an abnormality in thermogenesis despite normal cold induction of UCP-1 mRNA in BAT. Studies with a β3-adrenergic agonist confirmed that the peak oxygen consumption rate in thermogenic tissue is diminished in PGC-1α−/− mice. We propose that the thermogenic phenotype is related to reduced capacity for mitochondrial respiration in BAT. Interestingly, this phenotype was only evident during a rather narrow window of postnatal life. Animals at an older age did not exhibit cold intolerance, possibly due to the insulating properties of increased body mass. Collectively, these results demonstrate the importance of PGC-1α as a key transducer of physiologic stimuli to the control of energy metabolism.

The observation of fasting-induced hepatic steatosis is another example of the inability of PGC-1α−/− mice to respond to postnatal environmental metabolic demands. Following short-term starvation, we found that the PGC-1α−/− mice developed marked hepatocyte triglyceride accumulation. Further analysis revealed that palmitate oxidation rates were reduced in hepatocytes isolated from the PGC-1α−/− mice, which would predispose to lipid accumulation. Surprisingly, the reduction in fatty acid oxidation rates in PGC-1α null hepatocytes was not due to altered expression of PGC-1α/PPAR target genes involved in mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation. However, mitochondrial respiratory rates were diminished. In addition, we found that triglyceride synthesis was abnormally activated, and the expression of genes encoding SREBP-1c and SCD-1, key proteins in the hepatic lipogenic pathway, failed to be appropriately down-regulated in fasted PGC-1α−/− mice. The mechanism involved in this latter finding is unknown. Indeed, the relative contribution of increased triglyceride synthesis rates to the steatotic phenotype cannot be fully discerned from our data, given that this response could reflect the direct effects of PGC-1α deficiency on target genes or a secondary compensatory response to hepatocyte fatty acid accumulation. Consistent with the former possibility, recent evidence indicates that PGC-1α coactivates the nuclear receptor FXR, a negative regulator of SREBP-1c expression and triglyceride synthesis [33]. We conclude that reduced hepatocyte mitochondrial respiratory capacity, and possibly activation of lipogenic programs, result in hepatocyte triglyceride accumulation in the context of increased hepatic delivery of fatty acids such as occurs with fasting.

We found that after 18 wk of age, female PGC-1α−/− mice exhibit a mild but significantly abnormal weight increase associated with increased fat stores. Lean mass was unchanged at the time points examined. With further aging, a modest but significant increase in body fat was also noted in male PGC-1α−/− mice (unpublished data). The basis for the observed abnormalities in weight control is unknown. We did not find differences in food intake or activity levels in female PGC-1α−/− mice. It is possible that a reduction in systemic energy utilization, related to the mitochondrial dysfunction, leads to increased fat mass and weight gain in the PGC-1α−/− mice. Interestingly, an association between PGC-1α gene polymorphisms and obesity in humans has been recently reported [26]. Clearly, future studies of male and female PGC-1α−/− mice in pure-strain backgrounds over a range of ages will be necessary to fully investigate the observed abnormalities in weight control and fat distribution.

We did not find evidence for glucose intolerance or insulin resistance in the PGC-1α−/− animals on standard chow. Moreover, female PGC-1α−/− mice were more glucose-tolerant and insulin-sensitive than PGC-1α+/+ controls when consuming a high-fat diet. These findings are surprising, given the results of several recent studies demonstrating reduced expression of PGC-1α in human diabetic skeletal muscle [24,34]. It is certainly possible that compensatory metabolic regulatory mechanisms have been activated in the PGC-1α-deficient mice, accounting for this observation. Alternatively, PGC-1α could serve as a coactivator of factors that mediate diet-induced insulin resistance. Consistent with this notion, we and others have shown that mice lacking the PGC-1α target PPAR exhibit resistance to diet-induced glucose intolerance [21,35,36].

Histologic surveys of the PGC-1α−/− mice revealed ultrastructural abnormalities in the central nervous system. Inspection of sections prepared from the brains of PGC-1α−/− mice revealed patchy areas of microvacuolation in the pyramidal neurons of the cerebral cortex, accompanied by a mild increase in the number of astrocytes in the basal ganglia. The basis for this interesting but relatively nonspecific finding is unknown. It is possible that PGC-1α plays an important role in lipid metabolism related to membrane synthesis. Alternatively, the normal process of cellular debris turnover could be altered due to a defect in the energetics of the microglial component of the central nervous system. Although overt neurologic dysfunction was not apparent in PGC-1α−/− mice during the first 6 mo of life (no group differences were found on five of six sensorimotor tests), the PGC-1α−/− mice showed clear deficits on the inverted screen test. These deficits are likely due to impaired muscle strength in the PGC-1α−/− mice, but contributions by peripheral or central nervous system determinants (or both) could be contributory. Moreover, evidence of altered emotionality from the 1-h locomotor activity test also suggests the possibility of altered brain function in PGC-1α−/− mice. It will be of interest to determine whether the neurologic abnormalities contribute to the systemic metabolic abnormalities of the PGC-1α null mice.

During the preparation of this manuscript, Lin et al. reported an independent mouse line in which the PGC-1α gene was targeted [37]. Phenotypic comparison of the our PGC-1α-deficient line with that of Lin et al. reveals a number of similarities and several interesting differences. Both PGC-1α-deficient lines exhibit cold intolerance, reduced hepatocyte respiration rates, and neurologic lesions. However, a number of interesting differences are notable. First, in contrast to Lin et al., the PGC-1α−/− mice described here do not exhibit any postnatal mortality. Second, we did not find evidence for a defect in gluconeogenesis based on fasting blood glucose levels (unpublished data). In addition, whereas Lin et al. found an abnormal expression profile forCCAAT-enhancer-binding protein β and δ and the gluconeogenic genes encoding phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and glucose-6-phosphatase at baseline and with fasting in the PGC-1α−/− mice, we did not (unpublished data). Third, we found evidence for an age-related increase in body fat in PGC-1α−/− mice (females earlier than males), whereas Lin et al. identified a male-specific resistance to diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance. We have also found that male PGC-1α-deficient mice are somewhat protected against diet-induced obesity (Figure S4). However, we observed that the insulin-sensitive phenotype of the female PGC-1α−/− mice occurred in the context of normal weight gain with high-fat diet. These latter results indicate that the insulin-sensitive phenotype of PGC-1α−/− mice cannot be fully explained by a lean phenotype. Of interest, mice lacking the nuclear receptor estrogen-related receptor α, a known target of PGC-1α, exhibit resistance to diet-induced obesity similar to that of male PGC-1α null mice [38]. Fourth, the PGC-1α−/− mice described here exhibit a dramatic fasting-induced hepatic steatotic phenotype, whereas the Lin et al. mouse does not. Fifth, Lin et al. found a neurologic phenotype in males characterized by hyperactivity, whereas the PGC-1α−/− mice described here show reduced locomotor activity. However, it should be noted that we did not study activity levels over an extended period of time in males as did Lin et al., so it is possible that our findings reflect an emotional disturbance that manifests only when the animals are placed in a new environment. Finally, we report significant skeletal muscle and cardiac functional abnormalities (although the report by Lin et al. did not address these phenotypes, so this may not represent a true difference).

The reasons for the interesting differences between the two PGC-1α-deficient mouse lines are not clear. It is possible that distinct genetic backgrounds related to hybrid strains confer different degrees of secondary compensatory responses. In addition, the incompletely penetrant postnatal mortality noted in the PGC-1α−/− mice reported by Lin et al. could have resulted in a selection bias toward greater levels of compensatory responses in liver and other tissues in the surviving group. It is also possible that the method of gene targeting led to different phenotypes. Lin et al. generated PGC-1α−/− mice by Cre recombinase-mediated excision of exons 3–5 in oocytes. The PGC-1α−/− mice described here were generated by a targeting event that involved a 3′ homologous recombination leading to an insertion of the targeting vector including an extra exon 3 between exons 5 and 6. The exon 3 insertion, which was confirmed by RT-PCR, results in a mutant transcript that encodes a truncated protein. We were unable to detect normal transcript containing an exon 5–6 border, indicating that the targeting was accurate and complete. In addition, we could not detect full-length or smaller PGC-1α proteins by Western blotting. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that the sensitivity of the immunoblotting was not high enough to pick up a small amount of mutant (truncated) PGC-1α protein that could have some activity, given that it would contain nuclear receptor-interacting domains and the amino-terminal activation domain. If small amounts of PGC-1α activity are present in the mice reported here, it could explain some of the observed differences between the models. However, the bulk of data presented here support the conclusion that the PGC-1α−/− mice described are completely deficient in PGC-1α. Future direct comparison of the two mouse lines in pure background strains will be of interest.

In summary, this body of work provides evidence that PGC-lα is critical for the adaptive responses necessary to meet postnatal energy demands. Our results also suggest a broader role for inducible transcriptional coactivators such as PGC-1α in transducing cellular signals triggered by physiologic and developmental cues to the transcriptional control of energy metabolism and other dynamic cellular processes. In this regard, the inducible coactivator PGC-1α serves as a transcriptional “booster” to augment the capacity of downstream metabolic pathways critical for metabolic maturation and postnatal growth. Indeed, although PGC-1α null mice survive in the protected environment of the laboratory, our results indicate that in the rigors of a typical external environment, PGC-1α would be necessary for survival. Lastly, we propose that the PGC-1α−/− mice should serve as a useful murine model to investigate the role of altered energy metabolism in obesity, diabetes, hepatic steatosis, and diseases of the heart, skeletal muscle, and central nervous system.

Materials and Methods



Targeting the PGC-1α gene in mice

A BAC genomic clone containing the murine PGC-1α gene, isolated from an Sv129 genomic library, was obtained from Incyte Genomics (Palo Alto, California, United States). A 3-kb region spanning exon 3 was amplified from the genomic clone. A 5′ primer was designed to amplify a fragment with the 5′ end beginning 732 bp upstream of exon 3 just upstream of an endogenous Kpn1 restriction site (5′-AGTTTCCTTAGCAACTTCATA-3′). The 3′ primer contained a BamH1 site engineered by mutating the bases shown in lowercase (5′-AAGGATTTTAgGATccCAGTAC-3′). A second fragment downstream of exon 5 was amplified. In this latter amplicon, Not1 and Xho1 sites were engineered into the 5′ and 3′ primers, respectively (5′-TGGAGTgcGGCCGCTGGGA-3′ and 5′-AAAGAGTCTCgAgAATAGTTTCT-3′). The fragments were cloned into p1339-PGK-Neomycin targeting vector. The construct was linearized with Xho1 and electroporated into RW4 ES cells (Sv129 derived) using G418 selection. The electroporation was performed by the Siteman Cancer Center ES Cell Core at Washington University (St. Louis, Missouri, United States). The clones were screened by Southern blot using an Xba1 digest (see Figure 1A and 1B). One clone out of approximately 400 screened was positive for the homologous recombination on the 3′ end and an insertion on the 5′ end. This clone was injected into a C57BL6/J blastocyst. Chimeras were mated to C57BL6/J mice and germline transmission was confirmed by Southern blotting of tail DNA (see Figure 1B). All experiments were performed using sex- and age-matched or littermate controls as noted.

General animal studies

All animal experiments and euthanasia protocols were conducted in strict accordance with the National Institutes of Health guidelines for humane treatment of animals and were reviewed and approved by the Animal Care Committee of Washington University.

Animals were weighed at different time points. Male and female 3- to 8-wk-old PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice were euthanized, and tissues were dissected and weighed on an analytical balance. Tissue weights were corrected for total body weight before comparison. DEXA studies were performed as previously described [39] using a Lunar PIXIMUS DEXA system at 10, 18, and 24 wk in male and female PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice. For cold exposure experiments, male and female PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice were singly housed and placed at 4 °C for 5 h without food. Core body temperatures were monitored by rectal probe at baseline and every hour thereafter. Mice were monitored at least every 30 min to check for lethargy. At the end of 5 h, mice were sacrificed and tissues harvested for RNA and protein extraction. For fasting studies, animals were singly housed and given water ad libitum. Food was removed from cages in the morning and tissues harvested at 24 h for RNA and histology. Photography of the mice was performed by MedPic at Washington University School of Medicine. 48-h activity monitoring was performed by JAX Services (The Jackson Laboratory, West Sacramento, California, United States) using a Comprehensive Laboratory Animal Monitoring System (CLAMS, Columbus Instruments, Columbus, Ohio, United States). Briefly, 3-mo-old female mice were acclimated for 17 h before data collection. Data were collected every 30 min. Total beam breaks in the XY direction were tabulated for the 12-h light and dark cycles and compared across genotypes.

RNA, DNA, and protein analyses

Total RNA was isolated by the RNAzol method (Tel-Test, Friendswood, Texas) and Northern blotting was performed as previously described [40]. The PGC-1β and PRC cDNAs were generous gifts from Bruce Spiegelman and Richard Scarpulla, respectively. The UCP-1 cDNA was a gift from Daniel Ricquier. RT-PCR was performed as described [41]. In brief, total RNA isolated from soleus muscle, BAT, and heart of 1–2-mo-old PGC-1α+/+ or PGCα−/− mice was reverse transcribed with Taqman reverse transcription reagents (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, United States). Reactions were performed in triplicate in 96-well format using Taqman core reagents and a Prism 7500 Sequence Detector (Applied Biosystems). The mouse-specific primer-probe sets used to detect specific gene expression can be found in Table S1. The primers for UCP-1 have been previously described [42]. Actin primer-probe set (Applied Biosystems) was included in a separate well and used to normalize the soleus, BAT, and heart gene expression data. GAPDH Rodent primers (Applied Biosystems) were used in the same well to normalize the liver gene expression data.

For Southern blot studies, 5 μg of genomic DNA was digested with Pst1 or Xba1, electrophoresed on a 0.8% TAE gel and transferred to a Gene Screen (Perkin Elmer, Wellesley, California, United States) membrane for hybridization. Western blotting was performed as described [43] using the Enhanced Chemiluminescence detection system (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, New Jersey, United States). Ponceau S (Sigma, St. Louis, Missouri, United States) staining of the membrane was used as a control.

Mitochondrial respiration studies

Mitochondrial respiration was assessed in saponin-skinned soleus fibers with succinate as substrate and in the presence of rotenone as previously described [44]. In brief, 3-mo-old female mice were anesthetized with chloral hydrate (400 mg/kg of body weight). Soleus fibers were separated and then transferred to a buffer (2.77 mM K2Ca-EGTA, 7.23 mM K2EGTA, 6.56 mM MgCl2, 20 mM imidazole, 53.3 mM K-MES, 20 mM taurine, 5.3 mM ATP, 15 mM PCr, 3 mM KH2PO4, 0.5 mM DTT [pH 7.1]) supplemented with 50 μg/ml saponin and permeabilized for 30 min at 4 °C with gentle stirring. Fibers were then washed twice for 10 min each (2.77 mM K2Ca-EGTA, 7.23 mM K2EGTA, 1.38 mM MgCl2, 20 mM imidazole, 100 mM K-MES, 20 mM taurine, 3 mM KH2PO4, 0.5 mM DTT, 2 mg/ml BSA [pH 7.1]). Respiration was measured at 25 °C using an optical probe (Oxygen FOXY Probe, Ocean Optics, Dunedin, Florida, United States). Following measurement of basal state 2 respiration, maximal (ADP-stimulated) state 3 respiration was determined by exposing fibers to 1 mM ADP. The integrity of the outer mitochondrial membrane was assessed by adding 8 μM exogenous cytochrome c to ADP-stimulated fibers. State 4 respiration (uncoupled) was evaluated following addition of oligomycin (1 μg/ml). The solubility of oxygen in the respiration buffer at 25 °C was taken as 246.87 nmol O2 · ml−1. Respiration rates were expressed as nmol O2 · min−1 · mgdw−1.

Insulin and glucose tolerance tests

Glucose and Insulin tolerance tests were performed as described [35]. Prior to studies, mice were fasted overnight (GTT) or 6 h (ITT). In GTT studies, mice were injected with a 10% solution of D-glucose (1 g/kg). For ITT, mice received an IP injection of human regular insulin (Eli Lilly, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States) at a dose of 0.75 units/kg of body weight. Tail blood glucose was determined at 0, 30, 60, and 120 min after challenge using a B-GLUCOSE Analyzer (Hemacue AB, Angelholm, Sweden).

Indirect calorimetry

Oxygen consumption rates (VO2) of 5-wk-old female mice were measured using a Columbus Instruments Oxymax System. Resting baseline oxygen consumption rates were assessed for at least 1.0 h. For β3-adrenergic stimulation studies, BRL 37344 (Sigma) was dissolved in sterile saline and injected IP (2 μg/g of body weight) [45]. Postagonist assessment of oxygen consumption was recorded for an additional 1.0 h, with data collected at the 40-min time point.

Histology and electron microscopy

Soleus muscle and liver were dissected and fixed overnight in 2% glutaraldehyde, 1% paraformaldehyde, and 0.08% sodium cacodylate buffer. The tissues were postfixed in 1% osmium tetroxide, dehydrated in graded ethanol, embedded in Poly Bed plastic resin, and sectioned for electron microscopy. Cardiac and skeletal muscle mitochondrial and myofibrillar volume densities were determined from electron micrographs as described previously [10]. For each animal, three different fields at the magnification of 7500× were quantified in blinded fashion. Data were expressed as mean volume density of mitochondria or myofibrils in each field.

For electron microscopic analysis of the brain, tissue was prepared as previously described [46]. Ultrathin sections of cortex were cut onto formvar-coated slot grids stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined with a JEOL 1200 electron microscope. For H&E staining, sections of brain, including cerebral cortex, brainstem, and cerebellum, were dehydrated in graded concentrations of alcohol and embedded in paraffin from which 5-μm sections were prepared.

Primary mouse hepatocyte studies

Primary cultures of mouse hepatocytes were prepared from male PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice essentially as described [47]. Fatty acid oxidation and triglyceride synthesis experiments were commenced 2–3 h after the cells were plated. Triglyceride synthesis studies, were performed as previously described [47]. Palmitate oxidation rates were quantified using [9,10-3H]-palmitic acid as described [48] and corrected for total cellular protein content. For respiration studies, cells were spun down prior to plating and resuspended in a permeabilization buffer (described above) containing 50 μg/ml saponin. Respiration studies were performed in the presence of 5 mM succinate in the presence of 10 μM rotenone. Respiration rates were expressed as nmol O2 · min−1 · mg of protein−1.

Evaluation of locomotor activity, sensorimotor capabilities, and muscle function

To evaluate general activity levels and muscle use, mice were evaluated over a 1-h period in transparent (47.6 cm × 25.4 cm × 20.6 cm) polystyrene enclosures as previously described [49] using a high-resolution photobeam system (Motor Monitor, Hamilton-Kinder, Poway, California, United States). Each enclosure was surrounded by a frame containing a 4 × 8 matrix of photocell pairs, the output of which was fed to an on-line computer. The system software (Hamilton-Kinder) was used to define a 33 cm × 11 cm central zone and a peripheral or surrounding zone that was 5.5 cm wide with the sides of the cage being the outermost boundary. This peripheral area extended along the entire perimeter of the cage. Variables that were analyzed included the total number of ambulations, as well as the number of entries, the time spent, and the distance traveled in the center area as well as the distance traveled in the periphery surrounding the center. The total number of ambulations and rearings were recorded. For the inverted screen test, mice were placed on a wire mesh grid (16 squares per 10 cm) and the screen was inverted to 180°. A maximum score of 60 s was given if an animal did not fall.

The tests included in the sensorimotor battery [50] and accompanying protocols were designed as follows. (1) Inclined screen and inverted screen tests: For the inclined screen tests, each mouse was placed on top of an elevated (47 cm above the floor) wire mesh grid (16 squares per 10 cm) that was inclined to 60° or 90°. Each animal was placed in the middle of the screen with its head oriented down and was timed for how long it remained on the screen and how long it took to climb to the top of the screen. For the inverted screen test, mice were placed as above and then the screen was inverted to 180°. A maximum score of 60 s was given if an animal did not fall; (2) Platform test: Each mouse was timed for how long it remained on an elevated (47 cm above the floor) circular platform (1.0 cm thick and 3.0 cm in diameter). A maximum score of 60 s was assigned if the mouse remained on the platform for the maximum amount of time or if it could climb down on a very thin pole that supported the platform, without falling; (3) Ledge test: Each mouse was timed for how long it could maintain its balance on a 0.75-cm wide Plexiglas ledge without falling (60 s maximum). A score of 60 s was also assigned if the mouse traversed the entire length (51 cm) of the Plexiglas ledge and returned to the starting place in less than 60 s without falling; (4) Walking initiation test: Each mouse was placed in the middle of a square outlined by white cloth tape (21 cm × 21 cm) on a smooth black surface of a large tabletop. The time it took each mouse to leave the square (place all four paws outside of the tape) was recorded. The maximum time allowed was 60 s.

6–8-mo-old PGC-1α+/+ (n = 4) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 8) mice were run to exhaustion employing a motorized, speed controlled, modular treadmill system (Columbus Instruments). The treadmill was equipped with an electric shock stimulus and an adjustable inclination angle. Running velocity was set at 35 m/min, with a level inclination angle.

VO2max studies

VO2max was determined while the mice were running on a treadmill using an open flow system (Columbus Instruments Oxymax System). All measurements of oxygen consumption took place at an elevation of 150 m (ambient PBAR = 745 torr). Animals were placed into the metabolic chamber for 3–5 min to allow the system to equilibrate. Mice were then induced to run up an 18° incline at a speed of 40 m/min using a shock grid in the rear of the chamber. The speed was increased by 5 m/min every 2 min until the animals were unable to continue. Maximal effort was determined when oxygen uptake did not increase with power output and subsequently the mouse failed to maintain effort. VO2max was calculated using the averaged values over 1 min during which the animal's O2 consumption reached a plateau.

Isolated muscle stimulation studies

Animals were anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine and the soleus muscle was removed from one leg. Upon removal, the muscle was suspended in a Krebs solution aerated with 95% O2 and 5% CO2. The muscle and Krebs solution were suspended within a water bath maintained at 37 °C, and the muscle was anchored to a Grass (West Warwick, Rhode Island, United States) isometric force transducer (model FTO3C). Muscles were stimulated to contract with a Grass stimulator (model S88) generating a field stimulus through electrodes located at both ends of the muscle. Force-voltage (maximal force at about 100 V) and length-tension relationships were determined using single twitch stimuli. The stimulator then delivered repeating trains of stimuli at one per second at 40 Hz for 2 min. Each train lasted 330 ms, and were digitally recorded using MacLab (AD Instruments, Colorado Springs, Colorado, United States). Fatigue resistance was calculated as the ratio of the force generated by the last tetanus divided by the highest force generated multiplied by 100 to give the percent of force generation that remained after the fatigue protocol.

Exercise echocardiography

Adult female mice (6–8 mo old) were exercised on the motorized treadmill using the run-to-exhaustion settings described above for 60 s or until exhaustion, whichever came first. Immediately following its treadmill run, the mouse was subjected to serial echocardiography using an Acuson Sequoia Echocardiography System performed as previously described [51].

In vivo cardiac hemodynamic studies

Hemodynamic studies were performed as previously described with some modifications [52]. In brief, adult mice (10–12 wk) were anesthetized intraperitoneally (IP) with thiopental sodium (60 mg/kg). The mice were intubated and ventilated with a Harvard ventilator. The right carotid artery was isolated in the region of the trachea and cannulated with a 1.4-French high-fidelity micromanometer catheter (Millar Instruments, Houston, Texas, United States), which was inserted into the left ventricle retrograde across the aortic valve. Hemodynamic measurements were recorded at baseline and 3 min following continuous infusion of incremental doses of dobutamine (β1, β2, and α1-adrenergic agonist) up to 32 ng · gBW−1· min−1 [53]. Continuous pressure-volume data were acquired and digitized with the BioBench computer software data acquisition system (National Instruments, Austin, Texas, United States).

Isolated working mouse heart perfusion

Isolated working mouse heart perfusion was based on a previously described procedure [54]. Adult mice (4–7 mo old) were heparinized (100 units IP) 10 min prior to anesthesia. Animals were then deeply anesthetized with 5–10 mg of sodium pentobarbital IP. Hearts were excised and placed in an ice-cold Krebs-Henseleit bicarbonate (KHB) solution [118 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaHCO3, 4.7 mM KCl, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 2.5 mM CaCl2, 5.0 mM glucose, and 100 units/L insulin (pH 7.4)]. Hearts were cannulated first via the aorta and perfused retrogradely by the Langendorff method. Following left atrial cannulation, perfusion was switched to the working mode with KHB solution containing 1.2 mM palmitate bound to 3% fatty acid-free BSA with a preload pressure of 11.5 mm Hg and an afterload pressure of 50 mm Hg for 60 min with oxygenated buffer solution. Functional measurements, namely cardiac output, aortic flows, peak systolic pressure, and heart rate were acquired every 10 min using inline flow probes (Transonic Systems, Ithaca, New York, United States), a pressure transducer (TSD 104A, BIOPAC Systems, Santa Barbara, California, United States) and data acquired with the MP100 system from AcqKnowledge (BIOPAC Systems). Cardiac work was calculated as the product of peak systolic pressure and cardiac output.

Statistics

Data were analyzed using T-tests or ANOVAs (measures of general activity and sensorimotor battery). The level of significance was set at p < 0.05 in all cases. Data are reported as mean values ± SEM, unless otherwise noted. The ANOVA model used to analyze each sensorimotor test included one between-subjects variable (genotype), and one within-subjects variable (trials). When ANOVAs with repeated measures were conducted, the Huynh-Feldt (H-F) adjustment of alpha levels was used for all within-subjects effects containing more than two levels, in order to protect against violations of the sphericity/compound symmetry assumptions underlying this ANOVA model. In addition, Bonferroni correction was used when appropriate to help maintain prescribed alpha levels (e.g., p < 0.05) when multiple comparisons were conducted.

Supporting Information

Figure S1

Activity Levels in Female PGC-1α−/− Mice Is Unchanged

Using a CLAMS system, PGC-1α+/+ (n = 4) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 3) female mice were monitored for 48 h after a 17-h period of acclimation. XY beam breaks were tabulated over the 12-h light and dark cycles as denoted on the bottom. The bars represent mean (± SEM) beam breaks per each 12-h cycle.

(342 KB EPS).

Click here for additional data file.

Figure S2

Altered Emotionality in PGC-1α−/− Mice

An analysis of exploratory behavior included the number of entries into the center of the cage (upper left), the time spent in the center of the cage in seconds (sec) (upper right), the distance traveled in the center of the cage in meters (m) (lower left) as well as the distance traveled in the periphery (lower right). * p < 0.05 compared to the PGC-1α+/+ mice.

(620 KB EPS).

Click here for additional data file.

Figure S3

No Difference in Weight Gain on a High-Fat Diet in Female PGC-1α−/− Mice Compared to WT Controls

8-wk-old female mice were fed a diet high in fat (43% calories from fat) for 6 wk. The change in body weight (grams) after 6 wk on a high-fat diet is shown for PGC-1α+/+ (n = 8) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 11) mice. NS, not significant.

(264 KB EPS).

Click here for additional data file.

Figure S4

Male PGC-1α−/− Mice Are Somewhat Resistant to Diet-Induced Obesity

Male and female PGC-1α+/+ (n ≥ 6) and PGC-1α−/− (n ≥ 6) mice were fed a high-fat diet (43% calories from fat) beginning at 4 wk of age. Body weight was monitored weekly as shown on the graph on the left. The mean (± SEM) change in body weight is shown in the bar graph on the right. *, significant difference compared to the PGC-1α+/+ controls, p < 0.05.

(794 KB EPS).

Click here for additional data file.

Table S1

Probes and Primers

Sequences of mouse-specific probes and primers used for real-time RT-PCR.

(25 KB DOC).

Click here for additional data file.

Accession Numbers

The GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) accession numbers of the vector discussed in this paper is p1339-PGK-Neomycin targeting vector (AF335420).

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Deanna Young and Karen Hemker for help with mouse husbandry, Carolyn Mansfield for ES cell and mouse genotyping, Anthony Nardi for assistance with the studies to assess general activity and muscle strength, Bill Kraft for expert technical assistance with electron microscopy, Carla Weinheimer for performing cardiac catheterizations, Trey Coleman for performing the TAG assays, Krista Olson for expert technical assistance with the Langendorff method, and Mary Wingate for assistance with manuscript preparation. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants RO1 DK45416, RO1 HL58427, PO1 HL57278, Digestive Diseases Research Core Center (P30 DK52574), Clinical Nutrition Research Unit Core Center (P30 DK56341), and K08 AG24844. SB is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation. EDA is supported by the American Heart Association (Established Investigator) and RO1 HL70070.

Competing interests. The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

Abbreviations

BAT - brown adipose tissue

DEXA - dual-energy X-ray absorption

EST - echocardiographic stress testing

IP - intraperitoneal(ly)

NRF - nuclear respiratory factor

PGC - PPARγ coactivator

PPAR - peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor

PRC - PGC-1 related coactivator

SCD - steroyl CoA desaturase

SREBP - sterol regulatory element binding protein

SEM - standard error of the mean

TAG - triglyceride

Tfam - mitochondrial transcription factor A

UCP - uncoupling protein

WT - wild-type

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Deletion of the PGC-1α Gene

(A) Schematic of the gene targeting strategy. A region of the murine PGC-1α gene containing exons 3–6 is shown schematically at the top. Relevant restriction endonuclease sites are also shown. The targeting construct containing a neomycin (Neo) cassette is shown below the PGC-1α gene with dashed lines indicating the regions targeted for homologous recombination. Homologous recombination between the 3′ end of the targeting vector and the PGC-1α gene is indicated by the solid lines. The targeting construct inserted into the PGC-1α gene resulting in a duplication of exon 3 and incorporation of the targeting construct DNA into the final recombinant as shown. Probes used for the Southern blot studies and relevant restriction fragments predicted by digestion of the recombinant are also shown.

(B) Southern blot analysis of embryonic stem cells (ESC) (digested with Xba1) and tail DNA (digested with Pst1) is shown. The blots were hybridized with the probes shown in Figure 1A. Results for PGC-1α+/+ (+/+), PGC-1α+/− (+/−), and PGC-1α−/− (−/−) genotypes are shown as denoted at the bottom.

(C) Northern blot analysis using RNA isolated from the hearts of the three relevant PGC-1α genotypes (as in Figure 1B) is shown using PGC-1α cDNA as a probe. In addition, PGC-1β and PRC cDNA probes were used as shown. Ethidium bromide staining of 18S ribosomal RNA is shown at the bottom.

(D) Quantitative real time RT-PCR (Sybr green) was used to detect PGC-1α transcripts using primer sets crossing different exon borders as denoted. The exon 5–3 primer set detects only the mutant transcript (−/−), whereas the exon 5–6 primer set detects only the WT transcript. The values represent arbitrary units for RNA isolated from the tissues shown for the three amplicons comparing PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/−. N.D. = not detectable. The exon 10–11 amplicon was evaluated to assess levels of mutant versus WT transcripts. The values represent arbitrary units normalized to actin control.

(E) Western blot analysis using whole-cell protein extracts prepared from BAT under basal conditions and following exposure to 4 °C for 8 h. The signal shown was obtained with polyclonal anti-PGC-1α antibody [10]. An epitope-tagged PGC-1α, overexpressed in neonatal cardiac myocytes using an adenoviral vector (Ad-PGC-1α), is shown as a positive control. The Ponceau S stain of the protein gel is shown at the bottom.

Figure 2

Evidence for Tissue-Specific Growth Abnormalities and Mild Sex-Limited, Age-Dependent Obesity in PGC-1α−/− Mice

(A) The bars represent total body weight for the ages indicated for male (left graph) and female (center graph) PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice. The body weight (BW) of the 1-wk-old PGC-1α−/− mice was normalized to that of PGC-1α+/+ littermates, which was assigned a value of 100 (left axis). For the 3-, 18-, and 24-wk time points, absolute weights of PGC-1α−/− mice were compared to age-matched controls (right axis). Percent fat as determined by DEXA scanning for PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice (right graph). The results represent n = 4 (males) and n ≥ 11 (females) for each genotype at 24 wk. * p < 0.05 compared to corresponding PGC-1α+/+ mice.

(B) The bars represent organ weights corrected to body weight for 3-wk-old male and female PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice. The error bars represent ± SEM. Results represent n ≥ 14 for each group. * p < 0.05 compared to corresponding PGC-1α+/+ mice.

Figure 3

Abnormal Mitochondrial Phenotype in Slow-Twitch Skeletal Muscle of PGC-1α−/− Mice

(A) Representative electron micrograph of soleus muscle from 1-mo-old female PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice.

(B) Quantitative morphometric measurements of the cellular volume density for the mitochondrial (Mito) and myofibrillar (Myo) fractions based on analysis of electron micrographs (three sections from three animals per group). The bars represent mean ± SEM. * p < 0.05 compared to corresponding PGC-1α+/+ values.

(C) Gene expression data. The results of real-time PCR analysis of nuclear and mitochondrial genes involved in various components of mitochondrial metabolism and mitochondrial biogenesis: cytochrome C (Cyto c), ATP synthase β, Tfam, and cytochrome oxidase IV (COX IV). Eight littermate pairs were used for analysis at 1–2 mo of age and normalized to the WT value, which was assigned a value of 100, in each case. * p < 0.05 compared to corresponding PGC-1α+/+ values.

(D) Mitochondrial respiration rates as determined by oxygen consumption (VO2) performed on saponin-permeabilized muscle strips prepared from soleus of PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice (as described in Materials and Methods). The results are based on six female animals in each group, using succinate as a substrate in the presence of rotenone. Mean values (± SEM) are shown for state 2 (basal), state 3 (ADP-stimulated), and state 4 respiration (presence of oligomycin).

Figure 4

PGC-1α−/− Mice Exhibit an Abnormal Skeletal Muscle Functional Phenotype

(A) Measures of general activity and muscle strength. General activity levels were measured in 3.5-mo-old male PGC-1α+/+ (n = 8) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 11) mice using a photobeam system as described in Materials and Methods. Total ambulations (left graph), and rearings (center graph) provide a general measure of locomotor activity. Time spent on an inverted screen (right graph) represents a general measure of extremity muscle strength. The results from two trials are shown. * p < 0.05 compared to corresponding PGC-1α+/+.

(B) Exercise studies. Male 6–8-mo-old PGC-1α−/− and PGC-1α+/+ mice were subjected to a run-to-exhaustion protocol on a motorized treadmill (left graph) as described in Materials and Methods. * p < 0.001 compared to corresponding PGC-1α+/+ values. VO2max measurements were determined for 2-mo-old male mice for each genotype using a motorized treadmill at an elevation of 150 m and indirect calorimetry set-up (right graph) as described in Materials and Methods. * p < 0.05 compared to corresponding PGC-1α+/+ values.

(C) Time course of fatigue following repeated stimulation of soleus muscle is shown for 4-mo-old male PGC-1α−/− (n = 5) and PGC-1α+/+ (n = 5) mice (left graph). The mean percent force remaining at 2 min (Fatigue Resistance Index) is shown (right graph). * p < 0.05 compared to corresponding PGC-1α+/+ values.

Figure 5

Abnormal Cardiac Response to Physiologic Stress in PGC-1α−/− Mice

(A) Exercise echocardiographic studies. PGC-1α+/+ (n = 4) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 8) female mice aged 6–8 mo were subjected to an exercise protocol on a motorized treadmill. This protocol was designed such that the PGC-1α−/− mice ran to exhaustion based on the results of the exercise studies shown in Figure 4. Accordingly, an exercise regimen of 60 s was used for both groups. The graphs depict the heart rate (left graph) and echocardiographically-determined ventricular fractional shortening (FS) as a percent (right graph). Responses were monitored for 10 min immediately post exercise.

(B) In vivo hemodynamic response to the β1,α1-adrenergic agonist dobutamine. Male and female PGC-1α+/+ (n = 6) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 6) mice at 10–12 wk of age were anesthetized and a 1.4-French Millar catheter was placed through the carotid artery into the left ventricle as described in Materials and Methods. Heart rate (left graph) and a measurement of ventricular systolic performance, dP/dt (right graph), were measured following infusion of dobutamine. * p < 0.05.

Figure 6

PGC-1α−/− Mice Exhibit an Abnormal Thermogenic Response

(A) PGC-1α+/+ (n = 15) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 21) mice aged 28–37 d were subjected to cold (4 °C). Core rectal temperature was monitored over a 5-h period. The change in core temperature ± SEM is shown in the graph (left) as a function of time. * p < 0.05.

(B) Representative Northern blot analysis (blot and gel at top) performed with RNA isolated from BAT to detect UCP-1 transcript at baseline (RT) and after 5 h of exposure to cold (4 °C) (UCP1). Ethidium bromide (Eth Br) staining of ribosomal RNA is shown as a control. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR for UCP-1 transcript is shown on the graph at the bottom. The values represent mean arbitrary units normalized to a 36B4 transcript (control).

(C) Altered response to β3-adrenergic agonist. To evaluate the oxygen consumption (VO2) in response to the stimulation of BAT uncoupled respiration, the β3-adrenergic agonist BRL 37344 was administered to littermate PGC-1α+/+ (n = 5) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 5) female mice followed by measurement of VO2 by indirect calorimetry. Mean ± SEM VO2 is shown. * p < 0.05.

Figure 7

Fasting-Induced Hepatic Steatosis Develops in PGC-1α−/− Mice

(A) The photograph depicts the development of a pale liver in PGC-1α−/− mice subjected to a 24-h fast.

(B) Oil red O staining of histologic sections of liver taken from PGC-1α−/− mice under fed and 24 h fasted conditions. The red staining indicates neutral lipid.

(C) Representative electron micrographs of the liver from PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice following a 24-h fast. The droplets are indicative of neutral lipid accumulation.

(D) Mean liver TAG levels in PGC-1α+/+ (n = 5) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 5) mice under fed and 24-h fasted conditions. * p < 0.05.

Figure 8

Hepatocytes Isolated from PGC-1α−/− Mice Exhibit Reduced Oxidative Capacity

(A) Oil red O staining of isolated hepatocytes exposed to BSA alone (BSA) or 50 μM oleate complexed to BSA (oleate).

(B) 3H-palmitate oxidation rates. 3H-palmitate oxidation rates determined in hepatocytes isolated from PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice under cell culture conditions containing BSA or BSA + 50 μM oleate (2:1 oleate/BSA ratio). Values were derived from ten sets of triplicates for each group using hepatocytes from 5 mice of each genotype. The bars represent mean oxidation rates (n = 100) normalized to the condition of PGC-1α+/+ in BSA alone. * p < 0.05 compared to the corresponding PGC-1α+/+ mice. † p < 0.05 compared to PGC-1α+/+ with BSA treatment.

(C) State 2 and 3 respiration rates determined for hepatocytes isolated from PGC-1α+/+ (n = 3) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 3) mice using succinate/rotenone as a substrate. * p < 0.05 compared to corresponding PGC-1α+/+.

(D) TAG synthesis rates in isolated hepatocytes. The bars represent mean TAG synthesis rates (glycerol incorporation, see Materials and Methods) for hepatocytes isolated from PGC-1α+/+ (n = 6) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 6) mice. * p < 0.05 compared to the corresponding PGC-1α+/+ condition.

Figure 9

Female PGC-1α−/− Mice Are More Glucose Tolerant and Insulin Sensitive Compared to PGC-1α+/+ on High-Fat Diet

(A) At 4.5 mo of age, glucose tolerance testing (GTT) was performed on female PGC-1α+/+ (n = 6) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 6) mice maintained on standard chow.

(B) At 8 wk of age, PGC-1α+/+ (n = 8) and PGC-1α−/− (n = 11) mice were provided a diet containing 43% of its calories from fat (HF chow). The graphs depict blood glucose levels ± SEM in PGC-1α−/− mice during GTT (left graph) and ITT (right graph) studies. Studies were performed 5 wk (GTT) and 6 wk (ITT) after the initiation of the high-fat diet. * p < 0.05 compared to PGC-1α+/+ mice at the same time point.

Figure 10

Neuropathology of the Central Nervous System of PGC-1α−/− Mice

(A) Light microscopic appearance of representative cerebral cortex of 2-mo-old PGC-1α−/− mice demonstrates marked vacuolation of the neuropil (arrows) and scattered neuronal perikarya, which are absent in PGC-1α+/+ mice (hematoxylin and eosin). The scale bar shown is applicable to all sections.

(B) Ultrastructural appearance of typical vacuoles containing membranous debris, denoted by the arrow, in the cerebral cortex of a representative PGC-1α−/− mouse in comparison to PGC-1α+/+ (magnification 4000×).

Table 1

Cardiac Hemodynamics Measured in Isolated Working Hearts of PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− Mice

Values represent mean ± SEM

a p < 0.05

Table 2

Metabolic Gene Expression in Liver of Fed and Fasted PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− Mice

Values represent mean (± SEM) (n ≥ 6 for each group) mRNA levels as determined by real-time RT-PCR corrected for GAPDH signal intensity and normalized (to 1.0) to the value of fed PGC-1α+/+ mice

a p < 0.05 versus fed mice of the same genotype

b p < 0.05 versus PGC-1α+/+ mice of the same dietary treatment

L-CPT I, liver-type carnitine palmitoyltransferase; MCAD, medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase; SREBP, sterol regulatory element binding protein; SCD, steroyl-CoA desaturase; FAS, fatty acid synthase; GPAT, glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase; DGAT, diacylglycerol acyltransferase

Footnotes

Author contributions. TCL, JJL, BNF, PJS, and DPK conceived and designed the experiments. TCL, JJL, BNF, PJS, ARW, SB, MC, DFW, NS, CBM, ZC, DMM, RES, and EDA performed the experiments. TCL, JJL, BNF, PJS, ARW, SB, MC, DFW, NS, CBM, ZC, JOH, DMM, RES, JES, EDA, CFS, and DPK analyzed the data. TCL, BNF, and DPK wrote the paper.

Citation: Leone TC, Lehman JJ, Finck BN, Schaeffer PJ, Wende AR, et al. (2005) PGC-1α-deficiency causes multi-system energy metabolic derangements: Muscle dysfunction, abnormal weight control and hepatic steatosis. PLoS Biol 3(4): e101.Nuclear localization of Annexin A7 during murine brain development

Abstract

Background

Annexin A7 is a member of the annexin protein family, which is characterized by its ability to interact with phospholipids in the presence of Ca2+-ions and which is thought to function in Ca2+-homeostasis. Results from mutant mice showed altered Ca2+-wave propagation in astrocytes. As the appearance and distribution of Annexin A7 during brain development has not been investigated so far, we focused on the distribution of Annexin A7 protein during mouse embryogenesis in the developing central nervous system and in the adult mouse brain.

Results

Annexin A7 is expressed in cells of the developing brain where a change in its subcellular localization from cytoplasm to nucleus was observed. In the adult CNS, the subcellular distribution of Annexin A7 depends on the cell type. By immunohistochemistry analysis Annexin A7 was detected in the cytosol of undifferentiated cells at embryonic days E5–E8. At E11–E15 the protein is still present in the cytosol of cells predominantly located in the ventricular germinative zone surrounding the lateral ventricle. Later on, at embryonic day E16, Annexin A7 in cells of the intermediate and marginal zone of the neopallium translocates to the nucleus. Neuronal cells of all areas in the adult brain present Annexin A7 in the nucleus, whereas glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-positive astrocytes exhibit both, a cytoplasmic and nuclear staining. The presence of nuclear Annexin A7 was confirmed by extraction of the nucleoplasm from isolated nuclei obtained from neuronal and astroglial cell lines.

Conclusion

We have demonstrated a translocation of Annexin A7 to nuclei of cells in early murine brain development and the presence of Annexin A7 in nuclei of neuronal cells in the adult animal. The role of Annexin A7 in nuclei of differentiating and mature neuronal cells remains elusive.

Background

Annexins form a family of structurally related proteins, which bind to negatively charged phospholipids in a Ca2+-dependent manner [1]. They are characterized by a bipartite structure with a conserved C-terminal core domain and a unique N-terminal domain that varies in length and amino acid composition. The C-terminal domain is formed by either a four- or eightfold repeat of approximately 70 amino acids, each repeat carrying a Ca2+-binding site, and is responsible for phospholipid binding. The N-terminal regions are thought to confer functional diversity to the annexin proteins [2]. The biochemical features in vitro were analyzed extensively, but the in vivo functions of annexins remain unclear.

Annexin A7, the first annexin to be described, was isolated as the agent that mediated aggregation of chromaffin granules and fusion of membranes and phospholipids in the presence of Ca2+-ions [3]. Expression studies demonstrated the distribution of Annexin A7 in a wide variety of tissues and cells mainly enriched in the cytosol in close association with membranous structures, but it was also described in the nucleus of adrenal chromaffin cells [4]. The presence of an alternatively spliced cassette exon gives rise to two Annexin A7 isoforms corresponding in molecular mass to 47 kDa and 51 kDa. The isoforms differ in their N-terminal domain and exhibit a tissue-specific expression pattern. The 47 kDa isoform is present in all tissues except for skeletal muscle, where the 51 kDa isoform is exclusively present. Heart muscle, brain tissue and red blood cells contain both isoforms [5-8]. Previous studies indicated that the subcellular localization of Annexin A7 changes during myoblast differentiation. In undifferentiated cells the protein is equally distributed between cytosol and membrane fractions while in differentiated cells it is exclusively present in the membrane fraction [7]. Reports by Clemen et al. [9] and Herr et al. [8,10] demonstrated roles for Annexin A7 in shape and osmotic resistance of red blood cells, platelet aggregation velocity, and in the velocity of spreading astrocytic Ca2+-waves. Annexin A7 is also involved in the maintenance of regular cardiac electrophysiology and Ca2+-homeostasis [Schrickel et al., submitted]. Detailed reports on appearance and distribution of Annexin A7 during brain development are not available. In the present study we focus on the distribution of Annexin A7 in the developing brain of mice embryos between E5 and E16, and in the adult mouse brain.

Results

Annexin A7 is expressed in the early mouse embryo

First we examined the expression of Annexin A7 in ES cells (Bruce4, established from C57BL/6J mice) and the early stages of mouse embryonic development at the mRNA level by northern blot analysis and at the protein level by Western blotting and immunohistochemistry, respectively. Northern blot analysis shows in ES-cells and at embryonic days E7, E11, E15, and E17 two mRNA species of 1.8 kb and 2.4 kb, which result from alternative splicing in the untranslated 3'end (Fig. 1A) [11]. We found similar Annexin A7 mRNA levels in the four embryonic stages. Reprobing with a β-actin probe verified equal loading; the appearance of a faster migrating mRNA species in addition to the 2.0 kb species is characteristic for β-actin [12]. On the protein level, ES cells express only the smaller Annexin A7 isoform of 47 kDa (Fig. 1B, neuro-2a cells and heart tissue are included for control).

Figure 1

Expression of Annexin A7. (A) Northern blot analysis of RNA from ES-cells and embryos E7, E11, E15, E17 probed with a full length annexin A7 cDNA. Transcripts of 1.8 and 2.4 kb are detected in all stages examined (upper panel). Reprobing with a β-actin probe verified equal loading (lower panel, 2.0 kb band). (B) Murine ES cells (ES) express only the small Annexin A7 isoform. Both isoforms are expressed in neuroblastoma neuro-2a cells (N2A), heart (HRT) and brain tissue (CNS) from adult mice. Proteins from neuro-2a and ES cells, heart and brain were resolved by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (12% acrylamide) and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. The Western blot was probed with mAb 203–217 followed by incubation with a peroxidase coupled secondary antibody. Detection was with enhanced chemiluminescence.

Immunohistochemistry confirmed the presence of the protein during early development. Annexin A7 immunoreactivity using mAb 203–217, which specifically recognizes both isoforms of Annexin A7, can be observed in the two cell types of the cylinder stage at E5 with a weaker Annexin A7 expression in the ectoderm (Fig. 2A–C). At E8 Annexin A7 can be detected in almost all tissues of the embryo (data not shown). A correlation between the presence of Annexin A7 and the origin of a cell type from one of the three germ layers is not apparent. We specifically noted the localization of the protein in the neuroepithelium of the neural fold and tube (Fig. 2D–F, proximal, E8; Fig. 2G–I, distal, E13). At the subcellular level, Annexin A7 was present in punctate structures mainly in the cytosol of all examined cells (Fig. 2E,F). This distribution was also observed during subsequent development.

Figure 2

Annexin A7 immunoreactivity in early mouse embryos. (A) Phase contrast, embryo E5: The egg cylinder consists of an inner cell mass (a) representing the ectoderm and an outer layer of endoderm cells (b). (B) Immunostaining of the paraffin section was performed using purified mAb 203–217 and Cy3-conjugated anti-mouse IgG. Annexin A7 is expressed in both cell types of the egg cylinder with a strong staining of the endoderm and a weaker staining of the ectoderm. The nuclei are devoid of immune reactions. (C) Negative control using the secondary Cy3-antibody only. (D-F) Annexin A7 expression in the proximal neural tube (D) and nearby neural fold (E,F), embryo E8, transverse section. Immunolabeling of Annexin A7 was performed with purified mAb 203–217 and visualization was with an Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-mouse IgG. (D) An intense Annexin A7 immunostaining is detectable in the neuroepithelium of the neural tube (a, lumen of neural tube). (E,F) Higher magnifications of the neuroepithelium show that Annexin A7 is expressed in the cytosol. Arrowheads point to Annexin A7 immunoreactivity in the cytosol. (G) Phase contrast, embryo E13, caudal neural tube. (H) Immunostaining of the paraffin section was performed using purified mAb 203–217 and Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-mouse IgG. (I) Negative control using the secondary Alexa Fluor 488-antibody only. Bar, 20 μm.

Annexin A7 changes its subcellular localization in the embryonic brain at E16

Next we analysed the cellular and subcellular distribution of Annexin A7 in the developing mouse brain (Fig. 3). At E13–E16 in transverse sections of the embryonic brain, most of the immunoreactive cells are present in the ventricular germinative zone surrounding the lateral ventricle (Fig. 3A, overview E16; Fig. 3H, overview E13). A closer inspection revealed that Annexin A7 is mainly localized in the cytosol at E13 (Fig. 3B,E). During further development the immature cells have rounded up two days later, but they retain Annexin A7 in the cytosol at E15 (Fig. 3C,F). At E16 we observed the first prominent nuclear staining of Annexin A7 (Fig. 3D,G) in cells of the intermediate zone (Fig. 3I, oval), which contains neurons radially migrating towards the growing neopallium cortex [13,14] and also glial cells forming the white matter of the adult cortex. Cells located marginally in the neopallial cortex also exhibit a nuclear stain. Labelling in the ventricular germinative zone is less prominent and the cytosol is no longer more strongly stained than the nucleus.

Figure 3

Subcellular localization of Annexin A7 in embryos E13, E15 and E16. Paraffin sections of embryonic brain were stained with purified mAb 203–217. Annexin A7 was visualized with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated secondary antibody. (A) Overview, at E16 the immature GFAP-negative cells of the forming cerebral neocortex (b) surrounding the lateral ventricle (a) are strongly stained; square, a higher magnification of this area is given in (I). (B) Higher magnification of the earlier stage E13 (H) shows, that the cells are stained in the cytosol (arrowhead). (C) Two days later at E15 the cells have rounded up, and Annexin A7 stays in the cytosol. (D) At E16 the first nuclear staining becomes apparent (arrowhead) in cells of the intermediate zone located between ventricular germinative zone and marginal neopallial cortex as seen in (I), oval. (E-G) Confocal microscopy confirms the results in B-D. (H) Overview, at E13 the immature GFAP-negative cells are strongly stained; a, lateral ventricle. (I) Higher magnification of a cortical section of (A, square) demonstrating ventricular, intermediate, and marginal zones; oval, a higher magnification of this area is given in (D,G).

Mature neurons in adult mouse brain show an intense nuclear staining of Annexin A7

Both Annexin A7 isoforms are found in adult brain tissue (Fig. 1B). In general, we observed two characteristic staining patterns for Annexin A7, a prominent nuclear stain in neurons (determined by lack of GFAP-immunoreactivity, localization, morphology) and a cytoplasmic and nuclear stain in astrocytes (GFAP-positive) in all areas of the mature murine brain. In the neocortex (isocortex) Annexin A7 was strongly enriched in nuclei of neurons of all six cortical laminae (Fig. 4A, section derived from cortex temporalis). For control, in the adult brain type-1 astrocytes can be characterized by a positive GFAP-stain (Fig. 4B). Fig. 4F demonstrates the presence of nuclear Annexin A7 in a neocortical neuron of the external granular layer (layer II) and in an astrocytic cell of the neocortical molecular layer (layer I) which additionally exhibits an intense signal in the cytoplasm and in cellular branches. A further cell type of the isocortex showed a strong immunoreactivity in both, nucleus and cytosol, and was identified as pyramidal neuron based on morphology and absence of GFAP immunoreactivity. However, Annexin A7 apparently is more enriched in the nucleus (Fig. 4E).

Figure 4

Annexin A7 is present in neurons and astrocytes of the cortex temporalis and hippocampal formation of 10-weeks-old mice. (A) Low magnification of the cortex temporalis presents an Annexin A7 expression in cells of the pial border, in neurons of all six isocortical laminae, and a weak signal in the adjacent white matter. (B) Corresponding section stained with GFAP. (C) Staining in the Stratum pyramidalis (a) and in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus; square, a higher magnification of acorresponding area is given in (G,H). An intense Annexin A7 immunostaining is detectable. (D) Corresponding section stained with secondary antibody only. (E) Presence of Annexin A7 in pyramidal neurons (lamina pyramidalis externa) of the isocortex temporalis. These neurons were identified based on their morphology, distribution and lack of GFAP staining. AnnexinA7 exhibits a punctate staining, which is pronounced in the nucleus (arrowhead). (F) Higher magnification of image (A) also shows Annexin A7 in nuclei of neurons (lamina granularis externa (corpuscularis), arrowhead) and in the cytoplasm and nuclei of astrocytes (lamina molecularis, arrow; GFAP-confirmed). (G) Higher magnification of the pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus confirms the presence of the Annexin A7 protein in the nucleus (arrowhead) of mature neurons. (H) To further confirm this, a similar section derived from an AnxA7-/- mouse was stained with the annexin specific antibody and lacked the nuclear signal. The residual stain of the tissue is unspecific, as it is also observed in controls of the AnxA7-/- brain omitting the primary antibody (data not shown). All paraffin sections were stained with mAb 203–217 (A, C, E, F, G) or anti-GFAP-antibody (B). The hippocampal control section (D) lacks the primary antibody.

In the hippocampal formation we detected prominent Annexin A7 immunostaining in the stratum pyramidalis and in the dentate gyrus and also a weak astrocytic staining (Fig. 4C). The astrocytes are mainly localized in the area between cells exhibiting nuclear Annexin A7 staining and show the protein also in the nucleus and the cytoplasm (data not shown). When we analyzed the pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus at a higher magnification we found that Annexin A7 again mainly localized to the nuclei (Fig. 4G). Polyclonal antibodies gave a similar staining pattern (data not shown). The intense nuclear staining was absent in controls either stained only with the secondary antibody (Fig. 4D) or in brain sections derived from AnxA7-/- mice stained for Annexin A7 (Fig. 4H). The residual staining seen in the AnxA7-/- brain is unspecific as it is also present in corresponding negative controls lacking the primary antibody. The absence of Annexin A7 protein in brain and other tissues of the AnxA7-/- mouse has been verified in [10]. In another actual study of the knock out mouse we detected a thickened basal membrane and a widened intercellular space. This may cause unspecific binding of the secondary antibody.

An equal staining of Annexin A7 was also found in the cerebellum (Fig. 5A). Nuclei of neurons in the stratum granulosum show the most prominent staining (Fig. 5C,D). In the stratum moleculare, which is poor in cell bodies of neurons, only a few dots appear which also correspond to nuclei of neurons. Astrocytes are also positive for Annexin A7 in the nuclei and cytoplasm (data not shown). The signal of the pial border and the prominent stain of the white matter tracts (laminae medullares) are due to Annexin A7 positive astrocytes (Fig. 5 A–C). Higher magnification of the boundary layer between stratum moleculare and granulosum (Fig. 5D) revealed an Annexin A7 signal in nuclei, but also in the cytoplasm and at the plasma membrane of Purkinje cells (Fig. 5E). The typical pair of dendrites points to the margin of the cerebellar cortex. The specificity of the Annexin A7 signal was further confirmed in similar brain sections of the AnxA7-/- mouse (Fig. 5F). Fig. 5G shows Annexin A7 in neurites (axons) connecting the laminae medullares with the Purkinje-cell layer. Most likely these are the axons of the Purkinje-cells. Apart from these efferent neurites the laminae medullares (lamina alba, white matter) contain afferent mossy and climbing fibers. Thus, the intense stain of the cerebellar white matter arises from Annexin A7 located in astrocytes and neurites.

Figure 5

Annexin A7 immunostaining in the cerebellum of adult mice. (A) Low magnification of the cerebellum presents an Annexin A7 expression mainly in cells of the stratum granulosum and laminae medullares. (B) Corresponding section stained for GFAP. (C) Higher magnification of folia of the cerebellum, where a polyclonal anti-AnnexinA7 antibody was used; square, a higher magnification of acorresponding area stained with mAb 203–217 is given in (D). Between stratum granulosum and stratum moleculare the layer of Purkinje-cells (stratum neuronorum piriformium (ganglionare)) can be observed. (D) Staining of the band of Purkinje-cells (arrows). The positive Annexin A7-stain in the stratum granulosum is due to staining of the nuclei of neurons. (E) In addition to an intense staining of the nucleus, the cell body is AnnexinA7-positive including both dendrites of the Purkinje-cell shown. (F) Corresponding section from an AnxA7-/- mouse. (G) AnnexinA7 staining of axons (arrowheads) running from the laminae medullares to the Purkinje-cell layer located in the round end of a convolution. Sections A, D, E, F, G were stained with mAb 203–217.

Expression of Annexin A7 in the adult human isocortex

In the human parietal neocortex of aged individuals without any neuropathological alterations, subpial astrocytes exhibited a staining of Annexin A7 in the cytoplasm. A nuclear presence of Annexin A7 was limited to single astrocytes (Fig. 6B). Pyramidal neurons, predominantly those of layer V exhibited Annexin A7 at the plasma membrane of their perikaryon as well as of the apical dendrite (Fig. 6A,C). The neurons lacked a signal for Annexin A7 in their nuclei. Apical dendrites within the molecular layer also indicated a positive staining for Annexin A7 (Fig. 6B). The staining pattern of Annexin A7 in the human autopsy brain did not change after pre-treatment with trypsin.

Figure 6

Annexin A7 immunostaining in human isocortex. (A) Pyramidal neurons (bold arrow) and apical dendrites (small arrows) were clearly labeled with the antibody against Annexin A7 in the human parietal cortex. (B) A dendritic staining was also seen in the molecular layer (small arrows). In addition the subpial astrocytes were weakly labeled (double headed arrows). The staining was cytoplasmic, only few astrocytes showed a nuclear staining as well (inset). (C) Enlargement of (A): Annexin A7 was seen at the cell membrane of the perikaryon (bold arrow) and the apical dendrite (small arrows). (D) A blank control lacking the primary antibody did not show a specific labeling, but autofluorescent lipofuscin was detectable in the neurons (arrowheads). Bar, (A) 70 μm, (B) 50 μm, (B-inset, C) 17 μm, (D) 20 μm.

Presence of Annexin A7 in nuclei from neuronal and astroglial cells

The nuclear localisation of Annexin A7 in mice observed in immature cells at E16 and differentiated adult neurons could be only detected as a strong signal when the brain sections were pre-treated with trypsin before antibody staining. This procedure is thought to allow the antibodies to access epitopes masked by the formaldehyde fixation. Methanol fixation of cultured cells led to inconsistent results. Antigen retrieval in formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue sections employs various heating or proteolytic pre-treatment methods [[15-17]; Ein Handbuch für die Histologie, dianova GmbH, Hamburg, Germany]. These methods can result in moderate or strong specific antibody staining, but the detectability of other antigens might be decreased. Moreover, the optimal pre-treatment has to be individualised for each antigen.

To verify the presence of endogenous Annexin A7 in nuclei, we used a biochemical approach and purified nuclei from neuro-2a, PC-12, and C6 cells and treated them with a hypotonic extraction buffer to obtain the nucleoplasm (Fig. 7A). The nucleoplasm and the remaining nuclei, from which the nucleoplasm has been extracted partially, were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Western blots probed with mAb 203–217 showed Annexin A7 in the nucleoplasm of neuronal (neuro-2a, PC-12) and astroglial (C6) cell lines (Fig. 7A), however, the large isoform could only be clearly extracted with nucleoplasm from C6 cells. For control, antibodies against LAP2α, Emerin and tubulin were used to verify that the nucleoplasm (marker:LAP2α, which is anon-membrane-bound isoform of LAP2) was successfully extracted and also not contaminated by nuclear membranes (marker:Emerin) or by cytoplasm (marker:tubulin). Likewise, in these neuronal and astroglial cell lines Annexin A7 had been observed in the nucleus by immunofluorescence (Fig. 7B and data not shown). We noticed no difference between PC-12 and neuro-2a cells, however, as for the brain sections, we found an increase of the Annexin A7 staining after pre-treatment with trypsin.

Figure 7

Nuclear localization of Annexin A7. (A) Extraction of Annexin A7 from nuclei of neuronal (PC-12, N2A) and an astroglial (C6) cell line using a hypotonic buffer. Samples of total cells (c), and corresponding amounts of nuclear membranes (m) and nucleoplasm (p) were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Annexin A7 (AnxA7) isoforms are extractable from the nucleus of the indicated cells (47 kDa and 51 kDa isoform, arrowhead). For control, immunoblotting of LAP2α (75 kDa; non-membrane-bound isoform), Emerin (EM, 34 kDa), and tubulin (TB, 55 kDa) which are specific for nucleoplasm (LAP2α), nuclear membranes (Emerin), and the cytoplasm (tubulin) are shown. Note that the nucleoplasm is only partially extractable. (B) Immunofluorescence images of the PC-12 cells used. Cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with Triton X-100, pretreated with trypsin as indicated, and stained with Annexin A7 specific mAb 203–217, DAPI in blue, bar 10 μm.

Discussion

In the present study we explored the appearance of Annexin A7 during mouse development at the mRNA and protein level and focused on the central nervous system during embryogenesis. Northern blot and immunohistochemistry analysis show the expression of Annexin A7 in all embryonic tissues from day E5 on, the earliest day studied. Differentiating cells, like the neural ectoderm, which is the origin of the cells belonging to the nervous system, show Annexin A7 immunoreactivity mainly in the cytosol. Endodermal as well as mesodermal cells exhibit a similar subcellular localization of the protein.

In the developing brain we noted a striking change in the subcellular distribution of Annexin A7. Cells in the stratum germinativum of the neopallial cortex, which surrounds the lateral ventricle, show at E13 and E15 a staining for Annexin A7 mainly in the cytosol. But this staining largely disappears and at the following day E16 we detect Annexin A7 in the nucleus of cells in the intermediate and marginal zone of the neopallium. The different expression patterns of Annexin A7-positive cells from the ventricular germinative zone to the marginal zone of the later neocortex observed in this study are similar to the developmental patterns of Tenascin-C-positive astroglial precursors following the guidance of the radial glial cells [18]. Moreover, the patterns resemble that of migrating and differentiated neurons described by Berry et al. [13]. Neurons that are generated prenatally in the proliferative ventricular layer of the neopallial cortex subsequently migrate through the intermediate zone to form the different cortical cell layers in a declining inside-out gradient of cell maturation. These observations suggested that the subcellular localization of Annexin A7 depends on developmental stage and cell type.

In the adult brain we generally observed a nuclear localization for Annexin A7 in neurons whereas astrocytes exhibited both a cytosolic as well as a nuclear staining. However, pyramidal neurons of the isocortex and Purkinje-cells of the cerebellum exhibited a cytosolic stain of intermediate intensity including their neurites and dendrites. We have previously reported the expression of Annexin A7 in human temporal neocortex and hippocampus obtained from neurosurgery for therapy-refractory epilepsy and found the two Annexin A7 isoforms restricted to the cytoplasm and nuclei of astrocytes, whereas neurons lacked any signal [19]. The hippocampal area showed typical signs of Ammon's horn sclerosis, but the adjacent temporal neocortex tissue did not show any histopathological alterations. This data is in discrepancy with our actual observation in the murine brain. To determine if this is due to different methods in immunofluorescence staining or indeed different expression patterns in mouse and human, we repeated the immunofluorescence of human brain. This time we investigated sections from human parietal cortex of autopsy brain. The astroglial expression of Annexin A7 could be confirmed, although not all astrocytes exhibited the nuclear staining. Pyramidal neurons however indicated a distinct staining of Annexin A7 most prominent along their dendrites. The different results obtained for the neurons may be explained by the fact that we previously used frozen tissue sections or that they were derived from patients suffering from temporal lobe epilepsia. On the other hand the actual human brain tissue used was from aged patients and did not correspond to the age of the mice included in this study. In cultured cells after cell damage or apoptosis (unpublished observations) or in cells treated with a Ca2+-ionophore Annexin A7 translocated from the cytoplasm to cellular membranes [19]. We therefore favor the hypothesis that Annexin A7 in the sensitive neurons of the human autopsy brain may have similarly translocated to the cellular membrane. This property of translocation and membrane binding is common to all annexins and commercially available kits for apoptosis detection employ recombinant AnnexinA5. The presence of nuclear Annexin A7 in murine brain was confirmed by controls using sections from the AnxA7-/- mouse and by a biochemical extraction of the protein from the nucleus. Both Annexin A7 isoforms described in brain tissue seemingly are expressed by neurons and astrocytes, which was shown using total cell extracts of cultured neuo-2a, PC-12, and C6 cells. In addition to their expression in brain, both Annexin A7 isoforms have only been described in heart muscle and red blood cells [5-8].

Although the inactivation of the annexin A7 gene did not interfere with the viability and development of knock out mice [10], their generation allowed us to address the role of Annexin A7 in specific cell types [8,9]. Indeed, when we analyzed primary astrocytes from an AnxA7-/- mouse for Ca2+-dependent signaling processes, we found that they exhibited a significantly increased velocity of mechanically induced astrocytic Ca2+-waves as compared to wild type [9]. This led us to propose, that Annexin A7 can act as a Ca2+-buffer and is involved in Ca2+-homeostasis. In neurons Ca2+ ions play major roles in various physiological and pathophysiological processes [20-25]. One can speculate about an involvement of Annexin A7 in the regulation of these Ca2+-dependent processes, propositions that need further investigation. However, such roles are confirmed for heart function by studies of Schrickel et al. [submitted], who described an involvement of Annexin A7 in the maintenance of a regular cardiac electrophysiology and Ca2+-homeostasis.

An altered subcellular location during embryogenesis was also reported for Annexin A11. The developing gray matter of the rat embryonic spinal cord exhibited primarily nuclear localization of Annexin A11, while immunoreactivity was lost from the nuclei in the adult spinal cord [26]. In contrast, our studies show a relocation of Annexin A7 from the cytosol to the nucleus in cells of the embryonic neuronal tissue. The Annexin A7 distribution is determined by a variety of factors. An important one appears to be Ca2+, which promotes binding of Annexin A7 to membranes and also allows aggregation of annexins [27]. Binding partners of Annexin A7 such as sorcin might represent additional factors [28]. Although the members of the annexin family are generally found at the plasma membrane, in the cytoplasm or in association with the cytoskeleton, Annexins A1, A2, A4, A5 and A11 have been described to be localized at least partially in the nucleus [26,29,30]. Studies with human foreskin fibroblasts demonstrated that Annexin A1, A4 and A5 are all present in the nucleus at higher concentration than in the cytosol [31]. Raising intracellular Ca2+ led to relocation of these annexins to the nuclear membrane. An important role for annexins in mediating the Ca2+-signal within the nuclei of the fibroblasts was proposed. These results mirror studies with stably transfected C6 cells, in which high intracellular Ca2+-concentrations induced a marked redistribution of Annexin A7 from its localization in the nucleoplasm to the nuclear membrane [19].

None of the annexins contains a typical nuclear localization signal and their mechanism of nuclear import remains to be elucidated. For Annexin A11 it was shown that nuclear localization is mediated by its N-terminal region, which also contains a binding side for the S100 protein calcyclin [29]. More recently Tomas and Moss [32] showed, that Annexin A11 and S100A6 assemble at the nuclear envelope during nuclear breakdown. Their role in this process is not known. In general it seems that the nuclear localization of the annexins is actively regulated. For example the nucleocytoplasmic compartmentalization of Annexin A2 is controlled by sequestration of the AnxA2/p11 complex modulated by phosphorylation and by a nuclear export signal found in the AnxA2 3–12 region [33]. One function of Annexin A2 in the nucleus, that appears not to involve binding of p11, has been suggested by its purification as part of a primer recognition protein complex that enhances DNA polymeraseα-activity in vitro [34]. The annexins may participate in a nuclear response to initial cell stimulation or to a Ca2+-transient, presumably by regulating DNA replication. For Annexin A7 such a pathway is very speculative at the moment. Future studies are however directed by these findings and will concentrate on the identification of the nuclear localization signal of Annexin A7 as well as on the role of Annexin A7 in the nuclear compartment.

Conclusion

In this article we report the translocation of Annexin A7 to nuclei of differentiating cells in the developing murine brain. In the adult brain Annexin A7 generally was detected in nuclei of neurons. Astrocytes, cerebellar Purkinje-cells and neocortical pyramidal neurons exhibited both, Annexin A7 in the cytosol and in the nuclei. Thus, the subcellular localisation of Annexin A7 depends on the developmental stage and the cell type. A role of Annexin A7 as well as of other annexins in nuclei remains speculative. The results obtained by immunofluorescence were confirmed by extraction of Annexin A7 from nuclei of neuronal and glial cell lines.

Methods

Animals and tissue preparation

129SV strain mice were used. The day on which the vaginal plug was confirmed was defined as E0. All the animal experiments were performed in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH Publication No. 85-23). Pregnant females were sacrificed by cervical dislocation at various intervals between E5 and E17. Before E9, embryos were embedded within the maternal uterus. After E9, embryos were removed from their membranes and embedded separately. Experiments were performed with four to six animals at each developmental stage. The mature brain used was derived from mice of three to four month of age. The embryos and tissues were fixed in freshly prepared 4% paraformaldehyde solution for 2–12 h depending on the tissue thickness [35]. They were dehydrated with ethanol and embedded in paraffin according to standard procedures. Microtome sections were cut at 7–10 μm, placed on slides and stored until further processing.

Human brain tissue

Five human autopsy brains of male and female patients without any neuropathological changes (age 61–77 years; post mortem interval: 12–72 h) were fixed in an aqueous solution of formaldehyde for three weeks. Blocks of the parietal neocortex were embedded in paraffin and microtomed at 12 μm thickness. Sections were stained with aldehydefuchsin Darrow-red to confirm the absence of neuropathological alterations. All procedures were conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the ethics committee of the University of Bonn Medical Center.

Antibodies

Antibodies used in this study were mAb 203–217 directed against the core domain of mouse Annexin A7 [6] (purified IgG, 1:50) specifically recognizing both Annexin A7 isoforms [[6,10], and data not shown], a polyclonal antibody against mouse Annexin A7 [10] (1:200), a polyclonal antiserum raised against the astrocyte-specific intermediate filament glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; DAKO, 1:400), anti-β-tubulin (Sigma, 1:1000), anti-Emerin (novocastra, 1:2000), and polyclonal anti-LAP2α (kindly provided by Ronald Foisner, 1:5000).

Immunofluorescence microscopy

Immunohistochemical staining using mAb 203–217 as the primary antibody was with AlexaFluor488-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Molecular Probes, Leiden, The Nether-lands) or Cy3-labeled goat anti-mouse IgG as the secondary antibodies. Polyclonal anti-Annexin A7 antibody and anti-GFAP-antibody were combined with Alexa Fluor 568-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Molecular Probes). The specific labelling of Annexin A7 detected with the anti-mouse-IgG secondary antibodies in mouse tissue sections was confirmed using primary antibodies, which were directly coupled to Alexa Fluor488.

The paraffin-embedded sections were first treated three times for 2 min in xylene to remove paraffin and then rehydrated step by step with descending concentrations of ethanol for antibody staining [35]. After three washings in PBS (137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 8.1 mM Na2HPO4, 1.5 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.4), the tissue sections were incubated in PBS containing 0.1% trypsin for 10 min at room temperature to free formaldehyde-crosslinked epitopes [15-17]. After additional three washes with PBS, non-specific binding sites were blocked by incubating the slides with PBG (0.5 % BSA, 0.045 % fish gelatine in PBS) in 10% normal goat serum (NGS) for 2 h. Incubation with the primary antibodies was performed at 4°C overnight diluted in PBG supplemented with 1 % NGS. After five washes in PBG for 5 min each, the slides were incubated for 1 h with the secondary antibody at room temperature, washed three times in PBG and three times in PBS, 5 min each, rinsed in water and embedded in gelvatol [36]. For control, sections were incubated only with the secondary antibody or sections obtained from an annexin A7 knockout mouse were used [10]. Samples were examined with a confocal laser scan microscope (Leica TCS SP; Leica, Bensheim, FRG).

Immunofluorescence microscopy of human brain

The paraffin-embedded human brain sections were deparaffinzed likewise. Immunostaining for Annexin A7 was performed using the monoclonal antibody mAb 203–217. Microwave pre-treatment was used for all sections [15]. Trypsin pre-treatment was used as indicated. Carbocyanine 2 and 3 labeled anti-mouse IgG secondary antibodies (Dianova, Hamburg, Germany) were used to detect the primary antibody and showed similar staining patterns. Blank controls were performed, too.

Cell culture and growth conditions

The cell lines used were cultured according to the instructions provided by ATCC: murine neuroblastoma neuro-2a (ATCC CCL-131), rat pheochromocytoma PC-12 (ATCC CRL-1721), and rat glioblastoma C6 (ATCC CCL-107). One day before fixation with 4%paraformaldehyde and permeabilization with 0.5% Triton X-100, cells were seeded on coverslips. Immunostaining was performed as described for the tissue sections with or without the trypsin treatment.

Extraction of nuclear Annexin A7

Cultured cells were trypsinized, counted and washed once in PBS. They were resuspended in buffer1 (0.32 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris, pH8.0, 3 mM CaCl2, 2 mM Mg-acetate, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, 1 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF; 1 × 107cells/400μl buffer) and sonified on ice (sonifier UP200S, dr.hielscher, 40 s, amplitude 50%, cycle 0.5). This step was repeated until no more intact cells were observed by light microscopy. The resulting homogenate was centrifuged at 500 g for 5 minutes, washed twice in 1 ml buffer 1 without NP40 and centrifuged again. The resulting pellet contains purified nuclei. For partial extraction of the nucleoplasm according to [37], nuclei were resuspended in buffer 2 (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 20 mM KCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 25%v/v glycerine, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF; nuclei of 107cells/30 μl buffer) and incubated on ice for 30 minutes. An equal volume of buffer 3 was added in aliquots (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 800 mM KCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 25%v/v glycerine, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF, 1% NP40, protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma)) and the solution was incubated while shaking for further 30 minutes on ice. Then the solution was centrifuged for 15 minutes at 14.000 g, the resulting supernatant was used as nucleoplasm, and the pellet was washed once and adjusted to an equal volume with PBS. Nucleoplasm and nuclear pellet were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blotting.

Western blotting

Cells or cellular fractions were lysed in SDS sample buffer and homogenates were subjected to SDS-PAGE. Western blotting was carried out using the method of Towbin et al. [38]. Peroxidase-coupled secondary antibodies (Sigma) and the supersignal enhanced chemiluminescence system (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) were used.

Embryo Multiple Tissue Northern Blot

The presence of Annexin A7 mRNA in mouse ES cells and embryos E7, E11, E15 and E17 was analyzed by northern blot analysis. An Embryo Multiple Tissue Northern Blot membrane was obtained from Clontech Laboratories (Heidelberg, FRG). It contained approximately 2 μg of poly(A)+ RNA per lane from four different stages of mouse development. RNA from ES cells was isolated with the RNeasy kit (Qiagen). The membranes were hybridized with a random-primed [α-32P]-dATP-labelled full length annexin A7 cDNA probe and with a β-actin specific probe for control in ExpressHyb solution according to the manufacturer's directions.

Authors' contributions

MR, SIRG, and CSC planned and carried out the experiments, evaluated the results, and drafted the manuscript. CH provided polyclonal anti-Annexin A7 antibodies and brain sections of the AnxA7 knock out mouse, and contributed to the analysis of data. DT provided the sections the human autopsy brain, analyzed them by immunofluorescence, and contributed to the analysis of data. AAN conceived of the studies and participated in its design. All authors read and approved the manuscript.

Acknowledgements

We thank Maria Stumpf, Rolf Müller and Berthold Gassen for technical assistance, Drs. Andreas Hasse and Rolf Schröder for helpful discussion and Bettina Lauss for help with the manuscript. This work is supported by the Center of Molecular Medicine Cologne.A Developmental Switch in the Response of DRG Neurons to ETS Transcription Factor Signaling

Abstract

Two ETS transcription factors of the Pea3 subfamily are induced in subpopulations of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) sensory and spinal motor neurons by target-derived factors. Their expression controls late aspects of neuronal differentiation such as target invasion and branching. Here, we show that the late onset of ETS gene expression is an essential requirement for normal sensory neuron differentiation. We provide genetic evidence in the mouse that precocious ETS expression in DRG sensory neurons perturbs axonal projections, the acquisition of terminal differentiation markers, and their dependence on neurotrophic support. Together, our findings indicate that DRG sensory neurons exhibit a temporal developmental switch that can be revealed by distinct responses to ETS transcription factor signaling at sequential steps of neuronal maturation.

Introduction

Neuronal differentiation is a protracted process during which newly generated neurons express distinct cellular and molecular programs at precise times during their maturation: long-distance axon outgrowth, subsequent terminal branching, and finally synaptogenesis. Many important aspects of neuronal character appear to be acquired through the expression of transcription factors at progenitor cell stages, whereas others depend on expression immediately upon cell cycle exit [1]. But whether the orderly expression and activity of transcriptional programs at much later developmental stages, well after cell cycle exit, is an essential step in the progression of neuronal differentiation and circuit assembly has yet to be resolved.

The differentiation of sensory neurons of dorsal root ganglia (DRG) has been studied extensively with respect to inductive events that specify neuronal fate [2,3], as well as the involvement of late target-derived neurotrophic factors in the control of neuronal survival [4]. Recent evidence has begun to emerge that target-derived factors are also involved in regulating later aspects of neuronal differentiation [5,6,7]. In particular, genetic experiments have addressed the survival-independent role of neurotrophic factors during development by exploiting strains of mice defective both in neurotrophin signaling and in the function of the proapoptotic gene Bax [8,9]. These studies, for example, have revealed that neurotrophin signaling controls the acquisition of peptidergic traits in nociceptive DRG neurons and the control of target innervation [8,9].

The onset of some transcriptional programs in neurons, however, has also been shown to occur long after neurons exit the cell cycle. An emerging principle from work in Drosophila and vertebrates is that target-derived factors play a crucial role in the induction of these transcriptional programs [10]. In Drosophila, retrograde BMP signals from the target region control the terminal differentiation of a subpopulation of peptidergic neurons expressing Apterous and Squeeze [11,12]. In vertebrates, peripheral neurotrophic signals have been shown to direct the onset of expression of the ETS transcription factors Er81 and Pea3 in DRG sensory neurons and motor neuron pools several days after these neurons have become post-mitotic [9,13,14,15,16]. Moreover, the induction of Er81 expression in proprioceptive afferents is known to be mediated by peripheral neurotrophin 3 (NT-3) [9]. These two ETS proteins control late aspects of spinal monosynaptic circuit assembly, with Er81 directing proprioceptive sensory neuron differentiation and Pea3 directing motor neuron pool differentiation, respectively [14,15]. In particular, in the absence of Er81, achieved by mutation in the gene or by deprivation of peripheral neurotrophin signaling, group Ia proprioceptive afferents fail to invade the ventral spinal cord and to make effective synaptic connections with motor neurons [9,14].

The involvement of target-derived signals in induction of ETS transcription factor expression raises the question of the necessity for the observed delay in the onset of ETS signaling for neuronal maturation. Would precocious expression of ETS proteins in post-mitotic neurons also direct the appropriate sensory neuron developmental programs? In this study, we have used mouse genetics to test this general idea, by investigating whether the precise timing of onset of ETS transcription factor signaling is essential for normal sensory neuron development. We have assessed the biological effects of inducing ETS signaling either at the correct developmental time, or precociously. We find that within proprioceptive sensory neurons, the late onset of ETS signaling is essential for the establishment of normal sensory afferent projections in the spinal cord. Precocious initiation of ETS signaling in post-mitotic DRG neurons leads to abnormal DRG neuron differentiation characterized by neurotrophin-independent neurite outgrowth and inappropriate profiles of gene expression. Our findings reveal that target-triggered inductive signals provide an effective means of ensuring the late onset of expression of transcription factors, and thus an orderly temporal transcriptional sequence that is crucial for neuronal maturation and circuit assembly.

Results

To test the hypothesis that a temporal delay in the onset of transcriptional programs is crucial for the control of appropriate neuronal maturation, we studied the development of proprioceptive DRG neurons, since transcriptional effectors regulated by target-derived signals, as well as some of their downstream biological actions, have been identified for these neurons. Er81 controls proprioceptive afferent connectivity [14], and we therefore sought to identify an ETS transcriptional regulator that, when expressed over the normal time course of Er81 expression, is able to substitute for Er81 function within group Ia afferent sensory neurons. With this reference point, we then designed experiments to examine the effects of precocious post-mitotic expression of the same ETS transcription factor on sensory neuron differentiation.

EWS-Pea3 Can Replace Er81 Function in Controlling Ia Afferent Projections

We first defined an ETS transcription regulator that is able to replace the function of Er81 within proprioceptive afferents to direct projections into the ventral spinal cord. Er81, Pea3, and Erm constitute the Pea3 subfamily of ETS transcription factors, show a high degree of amino acid identity, and bind to very similar DNA target sequences [17,18,19]. Nevertheless, when introduced into the Er81 locus in analogy to a previously used targeting strategy (data not shown; [14]), neither Pea3 nor Erm could rescue Ia proprioceptive afferent projections to extensively invade the ventral horn of the spinal cord (data not shown). These findings prompted us to analyze mice in which we integrated EWS-Pea3, a break-point fusion product between the amino-terminal domain of the Ewing sarcoma (EWS) gene and the Pea3 DNA binding domain [20,21], into the Er81 locus (Figure 1). We found that in a luciferase-enzyme-based cell culture transfection assay, EWS-Pea3 showed stronger transactivation activity than Er81 or Pea3 (Figure 1J; data not shown), in agreement with previous studies [22,23,24]. Moreover, transactivation by EWS-Pea3 was abolished by mutation of ETS-binding sites in the reporter plasmid, demonstrating ETS-binding-site dependence (data not shown).

Expression of Er81 in DRG neurons of embryos containing integration of EWS-Pea3 in the Er81 locus (Er81EWS-Pea3/−) was abolished (Figure 1E), and the expression level of the calcium-binding protein Parvalbumin (PV) in proprioceptive afferents, which is decreased approximately 5- to 10-fold in Er81 mutants [14], was comparable to wild-type levels in Er81EWS-Pea3/− embryos (Figure 1F–1H). To further define DRG neuron differentiation in the presence of EWS-Pea3 in proprioceptive afferents in vivo, we assessed whether replacement of Er81 by EWS-Pea3 had an influence on neuronal survival or on the expression of proprioceptive-afferent-specific genes. Er81EWS-Pea3/− mice did not differ from wild-type in the number of proprioceptive afferent cell bodies within the DRG of L1 to L5, the expression of several genes normally expressed by proprioceptive afferents, and the lack of expression of genes not normally expressed in proprioceptive afferents (Figure S1; data not shown). Together, these findings suggest that the expression of EWS-Pea3 from the normal time of onset mimics the function of Er81 as assessed by induction and maintenance of gene expression within proprioceptive afferents.

To determine the extent of rescue of Ia proprioceptive afferent projections into the ventral spinal cord of Er81 mutant mice achieved by expression of EWS-Pea3, we traced intraspinal afferent projections by axonal labeling of PV (Figure 2A–2C). In addition, to analyze axon ingrowth independent of the level of PV expression in DRG neurons, we used anterograde labeling of afferent fibers by applying fluorescently labeled dextran to cut dorsal roots (Figure 2D–2F). Using both assays, we found extensive rescue of the projections into the ventral horn of the spinal cord in Er81EWS-Pea3/− mice (Figure 2C and 2F). Within the ventral horn, Ia afferents in both wild-type and Er81EWS-Pea3/− mice formed vGlut1+ terminals that were absent in Er81 mutant mice (Figure 2G–2I). To assess whether synapses between Ia afferents and motor neurons are functional in Er81EWS-Pea3/− mice, we performed intracellular recordings from identified quadriceps motor neurons after stimulation of nerves innervating the quadriceps muscle group. We found no significant difference in the input amplitude to quadriceps motor neurons when comparing wild-type to Er81EWS-Pea3/− mice (Figure S2; wild-type, 10.6 ± 0.9 mV, n = 11; Er81EWS-Pea3/−, 10.9 ± 1 mV, n = 8). Together, these findings suggest that in the absence of Er81, EWS-Pea3 can direct the complex biological process of correct laminar termination within the ventral spinal cord and the formation of synapses with motor neurons (Figure 2J–2L), thus identifying an ETS transcription factor suitable for heterochronic expression experiments in DRG neurons.

Precocious Expression of EWS-Pea3 in DRG Neurons Leads to Axonal Projection Defects

To address the consequences of precocious ETS signaling for proprioceptive afferent differentiation, we next expressed EWS-Pea3 in DRG neurons as soon as they became post-mitotic. We used a binary mouse genetic system based on Cre-recombinase-mediated excision of a transcriptional stop cassette flanked by loxP sites. Targeting cassettes were integrated into the Tau locus to generate two strains of mice conditionally expressing either EWS-Pea3 or a membrane-targeted green fluorescent protein (mGFP) to trace axonal projections of DRG neurons (Figure S3; [25]). Embryos positive for either Isl1Cre/+ and TauEWS-Pea3/+ or Isl1Cre/+ and TaumGFP/+ alleles showed efficient activation of the silent Tau allele in 95% or more of all DRG neurons, including proprioceptive afferents, at all segmental levels (Figure S3).

We first assessed the influence of EWS-Pea3 expression in early post-mitotic DRG neurons on the establishment of afferent projections into the spinal cord using the TaumGFP/+ allele or a Thy1-promoter-driven synaptophysin green fluorescent protein (spGFP) with an expression profile restricted to DRG sensory neurons at embryonic day (E) 13.5 (Thy1spGFP; [25]) (Figure 3). In contrast to wild-type proprioceptive afferent projections (Figure 3A–3C), GFP+ sensory afferents in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos failed to invade the spinal cord and instead were found in an extreme lateral position at the dorsal root entry zone, a phenotype observed at least up to E18.5 (Figure 3A–3C and 3G–3I; data not shown). We next visualized the path of sensory afferent projections towards the dorsal root entry zone in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos by injecting fluorescently labeled dextran into an individual DRG (L3; n = 3; Figure 3M–3Q). Sensory afferents in E13.5 wild-type embryos bifurcated at their lateral spinal entry point, and projected rostrally and caudally over six or more segmental levels while gradually approaching the midline (Figure 3M). Sensory afferents in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos also bifurcated at the entry point, although approximately 5% of afferent fibers continued to grow towards the midline (Figure 3O and 3Q). While rostro-caudal projections were present in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos, afferent fibers failed to approach the midline at distal segments and continued to occupy an extreme lateral position (Figure 3O), consistent with the analysis of transverse sections.

We next examined the establishment of peripheral projections upon precocious EWS-Pea3 expression in DRG neurons. While sensory axons in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos reached the skin and established major nerve trunks by E16.5, only rudimentary sensory axon branching was established within the skin (Figure 3D and 3J). In addition, there was a significant reduction in the number of muscle spindles in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos (approximately 25% of wild-type complement; n = 3) as assessed by innervation and expression of genes specific for intrafusal muscle fibers such as Egr3 (Figure 3E, 3F, 3K, and 3L; [26]). In summary, whereas isochronic expression of EWS-Pea3 promoted the establishment of proprioceptive afferent projections into the ventral spinal cord, precocious expression of the same ETS signaling factor in DRG neurons interfered with establishment of projections into the spinal cord as well as to peripheral targets.

Precocious EWS-Pea3 Expression Promotes Neurotrophin-Independent Survival and Neurite Outgrowth

To begin to address the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in the distinct biological actions of EWS-Pea3 at different developmental stages, we first turned to in vitro culture experiments. These experiments permit assessment of whether precocious ETS transcription factor signaling influences neuronal survival and in vitro neurite outgrowth of DRG neurons, two parameters prominently influenced by target-derived neurotrophic factors and their receptors.

We cultured E13.5 whole DRG explants from wild-type and TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos in the presence of NGF or NT-3 or in the absence of neurotrophins and analyzed neuronal survival and neurite outgrowth on matrigel substrate after 48 h in vitro. Without neurotrophic support, very few wild-type DRG neurons survived (Figure 4A). In contrast, culturing wild-type DRG with neurotrophic factors led to neuronal survival and neurite outgrowth. Addition of NGF, which supports survival of cutaneous afferents, resulted in straight and unbranched neurite outgrowth (Figure 4B), while cultures grown in the presence of NT-3, which supports survival of proprioceptive afferents, resulted in a highly branched neurite outgrowth pattern after 48 h in vitro (Figure 4C). Surprisingly, DRG neurons isolated from TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos and cultured without neurotrophic support survived after 48 h in vitro and had established long and highly branched neurites (Figure 4D). Neither the pattern of neurite outgrowth nor neuronal survival changed significantly after application of either NGF or NT-3 (Figure 4E and 4F).

To directly compare neurotrophin dependence of DRG neurons expressing EWS-Pea3 from the Tau locus at a precocious versus isochronic time of onset, we generated a strain of mice in which Cre recombinase is expressed from the PV locus (Figure S4). The expression of GFP in TaumGFP/+ PVCre/+ was restricted to PV+ proprioceptive DRG neurons and mirrored the onset of expression of PV at approximately E14 (Figure S4; data not shown). We next cultured E14.5 whole DRG explants from TauEWS-Pea3/+ PVCre/+ and TaumGFP/+ PVCre/+ mice for 48 h in vitro in the presence or absence of NT-3 (Figure 5). We found that DRG neurons from both genotypes survived and extended neurites only in the presence of NT-3, whereas they died in the absence of NT-3 (Figure 5). Together, these findings suggest that only precocious but not isochronic ETS signaling in DRG neurons is capable of uncoupling survival and neurite outgrowth from a requirement for neurotrophin signaling normally observed in wild-type DRG.

To determine whether neuronal survival of DRG neurons from TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos in the absence of neurotrophic support is sufficient to explain the observed neuronal outgrowth, we analyzed DRG isolated from mice mutant in the proapoptotic gene Bax [27]. Consistent with previous results, Bax−/− DRG neurons survived without neurotrophic support [28]. In contrast, neurite outgrowth of Bax−/− DRG neurons was significantly less (see Figure 4G) than that of either DRG from TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos cultured in the absence of neurotrophic support (see Figure 4D) or Bax−/− DRG neurons cultured in the presence of neurotrophic support (see Figure 4H and 4I). These findings suggest that in addition to mediating neurotrophin-independent neuronal survival, expression of EWS-Pea3 in early post-mitotic neurons also promotes neurite outgrowth in a neurotrophin-independent manner.

To begin to assess at which step of the neurotrophin signaling cascade DRG neurons from TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos become unresponsive to the addition of neurotrophins, we assayed the expression of neurotrophin receptors in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos (Figure 6). Whereas expression of the neurotrophin receptors TrkA, TrkB, and TrkC marks afferents of distinct sensory modalities in DRG of wild-type embryos (Figure 6A–6C) [4,29], TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos showed complete absence of expression of TrkA, TrkB, and TrkC in DRG neurons at E16.5 (Figure 6G–6I). This absence of Trk receptor expression in DRG of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos provides a likely explanation for the lack of responsiveness of these neurons to the addition of neurotrophic factors.

We next assayed whether the complete absence of Trk receptor expression in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos had an influence on naturally occurring cell death in vivo using TUNEL on DRG sections. Surprisingly, we found that apoptosis was decreased by approximately 50% (n = 3 embryos, average of >50 sections) in DRG of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos in comparison to wild-type (Figure 6D, 6J, and 6M). Quantitative analysis of the number of neurons in lumbar DRG of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos revealed a significant increase to approximately 170% of wild-type levels (Figure 6E, 6K, and 6N). Moreover, BrdU pulse-chase experiments ruled out the possibility that DRG neurons in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos reenter the cell cycle (no BrdU+/LacZ+ cells, n = 3 embryos, analysis of >50 sections each; Figure 6F and 6L). Together with the in vitro culture experiments, these findings suggest that DRG neurons from TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos remain post-mitotic but fail to become sensitive to naturally occurring cell death, and survive in the absence of Trk receptors and neurotrophic support.

We next analyzed whether changes in the expression of proteins known to be involved in the regulation of neuronal survival or cell death could be detected in DRG of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos. We found no significant quantitative changes in the level of Akt/p-Akt or CREB/p-CREB in DRG (Figure 6O and 6P) both of which have been shown to be key regulators of neuronal survival [29]. Moreover, the level of the proapoptotic Bcl2 family member Bax was not significantly reduced (Figure 6O and 6P). In contrast, the expression level of the anti-apoptotic Bcl2 family members Bcl-xl and Bcl2 was significantly increased when compared to wild-type levels (Bcl2, 157%; Bcl-xl, 259%; average of n = 3 independent experiments; Figure 6O and 6P), providing a potential molecular explanation for the enhanced neuronal survival of DRG neurons of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos in the absence of Trk receptor expression [30].

Only Precocious but Not Isochronic ETS Signaling in DRG Neurons Interferes with Neuronal Fate Acquisition

The observed differences in neuronal survival and neurite outgrowth between precocious and isochronic expression of EWS-Pea3 prompted us to perform a direct comparative analysis of gene expression between mice with precocious EWS-Pea3 expression and mice in which the expression of EWS-Pea3 is initiated in DRG sensory neurons from the time of normal onset of Er81 expression. Moreover, to rule out the possibility that a differential effect may be due to the different genetic strategies by which expression of EWS-Pea3 in proprioceptive afferents is achieved, we performed this analysis both in Er81EWS-Pea3/− and TauEWS-Pea3/+ PVCre/+ embryos.

We first analyzed expression of TrkC, a gene downregulated in DRG neurons of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos (Figure 7A and 7B). The level of expression of TrkC was indistinguishable from wild-type in DRG neurons of Er81EWS-Pea3/− and TauEWS-Pea3/+ PVCre/+ embryos (Figure 7A, 7C, and 7D). Moreover, PV was not expressed in DRG neurons of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos (Figure S5) but was expressed by proprioceptive afferents in both wild-type and Er81EWS-Pea3/− embryos (see Figures 1 and S5) [14]. We also found several genes that were ectopically upregulated in DRG neurons of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos (Figure 7). Calretinin and Calbindin, two different calcium-binding proteins expressed by subpopulations of DRG neurons in wild-type, Er81EWS-Pea3/−, and TauEWS-Pea3/+ PVCre/+ embryos (Figure 7E, 7G, and 7H; data not shown) [31,32], were induced in more than 95% of all DRG neurons of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos (Figures 7F and S5). These findings suggest that DRG neurons in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos fail to differentiate to a normal fate and instead acquire an aberrant identity distinct from any subpopulation of wild-type DRG neurons. Finally, to assess whether EWS-Pea3 expressed precociously acts exclusively cell-autonomously or whether it may also influence neighboring DRG neurons, we activated expression of EWS-Pea3 using Hb9Cre mice [33]. Due to a transient and rostro-caudally graded expression of Hb9 at neural plate stages, very few DRG neurons at brachial levels and increasingly more neurons progressing caudally undergo recombination in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Hb9Cre/+ and TaumGFP/+ Hb9Cre/+ embryos (Figure 8). Nevertheless, downregulation of Trk receptor expression or upregulation of Calretinin is restricted exclusively to neurons that have undergone recombination and cannot be observed in TaumGFP/+ Hb9Cre/+ embryos (Figure 8). Together, these results and the findings obtained from in vitro culture experiments (see Figures 4 and 5) demonstrate that precocious or isochronic expression of EWS-Pea3 in the same neurons leads to significantly different cell-autonomous cellular responses with respect to gene expression, neuronal survival, and neurite outgrowth (Figure 9).

Discussion

Target-derived signals exhibit a conserved role in the induction of defined programs of transcription factor expression late in post-mitotic neuronal differentiation [10]. This study provides evidence that the late onset of transcription factor expression is essential for many later aspects of neuronal differentiation and circuit formation. Our data indicate that DRG neurons undergo a temporal change in their competence to respond to ETS transcription factor signaling, as assessed by changes in gene expression and axonal target invasion (Figure 9). Our findings argue for the necessity of target-induced, and therefore temporally controlled, upregulation of ETS transcription factor signaling. More generally, they suggest that temporally regulated activation of transcriptional programs coupled to a particular fate induced in neurons at early developmental stages represents an important mechanism of neuronal maturation.

One striking observation of this study is that precocious induction of ETS signaling promotes neuronal survival without a requirement for neurotrophic support and in complete absence of Trk receptor expression. In contrast, ETS signaling at the normal time of onset of Er81 expression does not result in enhanced neuronal survival in the absence of neurotrophins and also does not lead to downregulation of TrkC expression in proprioceptive afferents. These findings demonstrate very distinct activities of one transcriptional regulator at different developmental steps within a committed post-mitotic neuronal lineage. The absence of Trk receptor expression upon precocious induction of ETS signaling can only partially explain the observed phenotype in axonal projections. Elimination of TrkA receptor signaling in Bax mutant mice perturbs establishment of peripheral projections of cutaneous afferents, whereas establishment of central projections does not appear to be affected [8]. In the absence of NT-3 signaling, development of central as well as peripheral proprioceptive afferent projections is perturbed [9]. In contrast, upon precocious induction of ETS signaling, we found more pronounced defects in the establishment of central rather than peripheral projections for all DRG neurons.

Induction of Er81 expression in proprioceptive afferents is controlled by peripheral NT-3 as axons reach the vicinity of target muscles, and thus occurs only approximately 3 d after proprioceptive neurons become post-mitotic [9,14]. This temporally delayed and target-induced upregulation of ETS transcription factor expression several days after a neuronal lineage of a specific identity first emerges is not restricted to DRG sensory neurons, but is also found in motor neuron pools [13]. Target-derived factors have also been implicated in controlling neuronal maturation of predetermined neurons in Drosophila, in which expression of members of the BMP family in the target region is essential for the induction of mature peptidergic properties in a subpopulation of neurons marked by the coordinate expression of the two transcription factors Apterous and Squeeze [11,12]. Thus, both in Drosophila and vertebrates, target-derived factors appear to act permissively to induce the expression of transcriptional programs involved in terminal neuronal maturation.

Our findings are compatible with a model in which DRG neurons acquire their mature fate by sequential and temporally controlled addition of lineage-specific features (Figure 9). Target-derived factors act on predetermined neuronal lineages to switch their developmental programs to become compatible with processes such as target invasion and branching. Such a transition state in the acquisition of a defined neuronal fate would be accompanied by the induction of appropriate transcriptional programs through the expression of specific transcription factors. Mechanisms such as chromosomal remodeling that restrict or expand access to certain target genes [34] or activation by cofactors responsible for changing the action of particular transcription factors [35] could represent possible mechanisms by which the downstream transcriptional profile of a transcription factor could be temporally shifted towards the selection and control of distinct target genes. Interestingly, several ETS transcription factors are activated through release of autoinhibition via interaction with cofactors and/or via post-translational modifications [35,36,37]. The fusion of EWS with Pea3 could circumvent a need for activation through specific cofactors while still maintaining ETS site dependence, thus rendering EWS-Pea3 less sensitive to the cellular context than endogenous ETS transcription factors. Using this fusion protein, our experiments demonstrate a profound change in the action of ETS signaling at the level of transcriptional regulation within post-mitotic DRG neurons over time. Moreover, the observed transcriptional shift in ETS signaling is paired with the onset of appropriate regulation of neuronal subtype specification and establishment of axonal projections into the target area.

Recent experiments addressing the temporal constraints of transcription factor action in proliferating neural progenitor cells adds to the idea that defined temporal windows, during which transcription factors act to control distinct downstream target genes, are of key importance to neuronal fate acquisition. During Drosophila neuroblast generation, the transcription factor Hunchback controls specification and differentiation of early-born neuroblasts [38]. Over time, however, neuroblasts progressively lose their competence to generate cells of an early fate in response to Hunchback expression [39]. These findings thus also argue for a change in cellular competence to respond to a specific transcription factor over time albeit in an early precursor context. More generally, during the differentiation of hematopoietic lineages, several transcription factors have also been shown to exhibit distinct functions at progressive steps of lineage specification [40]. Analysis of the mechanisms by which transcription factor programs can be shifted over time to control different complements of downstream genes and thus different aspects of neuronal and cellular fates in progenitor cells or post-mitotic neurons may provide further insight into the way in which transcription factors act to control the assembly of neuronal circuits.

Materials and Methods



Generation of transgenic mice and mouse genetics

Er81EWS-Pea3 mice were generated following a strategy similar to that described for the generation of Er81NLZ mice [14]. In brief, a targeting vector with a cDNA coding for EWS-Pea3 was inserted in frame with the endogenous start ATG into exon 2 of the Er81 genomic locus and used for homologous recombination in W95 ES cells. EWS-Pea3 represents a fusion gene between the amino terminal of EWS and the ETS domain of Pea3 [20]. The primer pair used to specifically detect the Er81EWS-Pea3 allele was 5′-CAGCCACTGCACCTACAAGAC-3′ and 5′-CTTCCTGCTTGATGTCTCCTTC-3′. For the generation of TaumGFP and TauEWS-Pea3 mice, lox-STOP-lox-mGFP-IRES-NLS-LacZ-pA and lox-STOP-lox-EWS-Pea3-IRES-NLS-LacZ-pA targeting cassettes were integrated into exon 2 of the Tau genomic locus (the endogenous start ATG was removed in the targeting vectors; details available upon request). mGFP was provided by P. Caroni [25]. ES cell recombinants were screened by Southern blot analysis using the probe in the 5′ region as described previously [41]. Frequency of recombination in 129/Ola ES cells was approximately 1/3 for both Tau constructs. For the generation of PVCre mice, mouse genomic clones were obtained by screening a 129SV/J genomic library (Incyte, Wilmington, Delaware, United States). For details on the genomic structure of the mouse PV locus see [42]. An IRES-Cre-pA targeting cassette [33] was integrated into the 3′ UTR of exon 5, and ES cell recombinants were screened with a 5′ probe (oligos, 5′-GAGATGACCCAGCCAGGATGCCTC-3′ and 5′-CTGACCACTCTCGCTCCGGTGTCC-3′; genomic DNA, HindIII digest). The frequency of recombination in 129/Ola ES cells was approximately 1/20. Recombinant clones were aggregated with morula stage embryos to generate chimeric founder mice that transmitted the mutant alleles. In all experiments performed in this study, animals were of mixed genetic background (129/Ola and C57Bl6). Thy1spGFP transgenic mice were generated in analogy to De Paola et al. [25], and for these experiments a strain of mice with early embryonic expression was selected. Isl1Cre and Hb9Cre mouse strains have been described [33,43] and Bax+/− animals were from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine, United States) [27]. Timed pregnancies were set up to generate embryos of different developmental stages with all genotypes described throughout the study.

Transcriptional transactivation assays

The following plasmids were used for transcriptional transactivation assays: pRc/RSV (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, United States), pRc/RSV-Er81, pRc/RSV-EWS-Pea3, pTP-5xETS, and pTP-5xETSmut. pRc/RSV-Er81 and pRc/RSV-EWS-Pea3 were obtained by insertion of the cDNAs for Er81 or EWS-Pea3 (gift from J. A. Hassell) into pRc/RSV. pTP-5xETS was constructed by inserting a cassette of five repetitive copies of high-affinity Pea3 binding sites (5′-GCCGGAAGC-3′) [18,19] into a modified version of pTK-Luc. pTP-5xETSmut was generated as pTP-5xETS but using a mutated complement of the Pea3 binding sites (5′-GCCTATGGC-3′). A control plasmid to normalize for transfection efficiency (placZ) and pTK-Luc were a gift from D. Kressler. COS-7 cells were co-transfected with 1–1.2 μg of total DNA including one of the effector plasmids pRc/RSV-empty, pRc/RSV-Er81, or pRc/RSV-EWS-Pea3; one of the reporter plasmids pTP-5xETS or pTP-5xETSmut; and placZ. Cells were harvested after 25 h and processed for assays to determine luciferase and LacZ activity as described previously [44]. Luciferase values normalized to LacZ activity are referred to as luciferase units.

In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry

For in situ hybridization analysis, cryostat sections were hybridized using digoxigenin-labeled probes [45] directed against mouse TrkA or TrkB, or rat TrkC (gift from L. F. Parada). Antibodies used in this study were as follows: rabbit anti-Er81 [14], rabbit anti-Pea3 [14], rabbit anti-PV [14], rabbit anti-eGFP (Molecular Probes, Eugene, Oregon, United States), rabbit anti-Calbindin, rabbit anti-Calretinin (Swant, Bellinzona, Switzerland), rabbit anti-CGRP (Chemicon, Temecula, California, United States), rabbit anti-vGlut1 (Synaptic Systems, Goettingen, Germany), rabbit anti-Brn3a (gift from E. Turner), rabbit anti-TrkA and -p75 (gift from L. F. Reichardt), rabbit anti-Runx3 (Kramer and Arber, unpublished reagent), rabbit anti-Rhodamine (Molecular Probes), mouse anti-neurofilament (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, Virginia, United States), sheep anti-eGFP (Biogenesis, Poole, United Kingdom), goat anti-LacZ [14], goat anti-TrkC (gift from L. F. Reichardt), and guinea pig anti-Isl1 [14]. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated biotinylated UTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) to detect apoptotic cells in E13.5 DRG on cryostat sections was performed as described by the manufacturer (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Quantitative analysis of TUNEL+ DRG cells was performed essentially as described [27]. BrdU pulse-chase experiments and LacZ wholemount stainings were performed as previously described [46]. For anterograde tracing experiments to visualize projections of sensory neurons, rhodamine-conjugated dextran (Molecular Probes) was injected into single lumbar (L3) DRG at E13.5 or applied to whole lumbar dorsal roots (L3) at postnatal day (P) 5 using glass capillaries. After injection, animals were incubated for 2–3 h (E13.5) or overnight (P5). Cryostat sections were processed for immunohistochemistry as described [14] using fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:1,000, Molecular Probes). Images were collected on an Olympus (Tokyo, Japan) confocal microscope. Images from in situ hybridization experiments were collected with an RT-SPOT camera (Diagnostic Instruments, Sterling Heights, Michigan, United States), and Corel (Eden Prairie, Minnesota, United States) Photo Paint 10.0 was used for digital processing of images.

In vitro cultures of DRG

Individual lumbar DRG were dissected from E13.5 or E14.5 embryos and placed on Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, California, United States) coated coverslips in DMEM/F12 (Gibco, San Diego, California, United States), 2 mM L-Gln (Gibco), N2 (Gibco), and 1 mg/ml BSA (Sigma, St. Louis, Missouri, United States) without neurotrophins, or supplemented with either NGF (100 ng/ml, Gibco) or NT-3 (20 ng/ml, Sigma). DRG explants (n ≥ 20 for each condition) were cultured for 48 h, processed for immunocytochemistry, and analyzed using confocal microscopy.

Western blot analysis

Lumbar DRG from E16.5 embryos were isolated, mechanically disrupted, homogenized using glass beads (Sigma), and lysed in standard lysis buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors as described [47]. Protein extracts were resolved by SDS-PAGE, and immunoblotting was performed using antibodies against Akt, p-Akt (Ser473), CREB, p-CREB (Ser133), Bax, Bcl-xl (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, Massachusetts, United States), and Bcl2 (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, California, United States). For quantification, films (X-OMAT AR, Eastman Kodak, Rochester, New York, United States) were scanned and densitometry was performed using IMAGEQUANT 5.2 (Molecular Dynamics, Amersham, Uppsala, Sweden).

Electrophysiology

Electrophysiological analysis was performed as previously described [48]. Briefly, intracellular recordings from identified quadriceps motor neurons were made using sharp electrodes (75–120 MΩ, 3M KCl). Average responses (10–20 trials) from suprathreshold nerve stimulation (1.5 times the strength that evokes maximal monosynaptic response) of the quadriceps nerve were acquired with LTP software [49]. Only cells with stable resting potentials more negative than −50 mV were considered for analysis. Monosynaptic amplitudes were determined offline using custom routines in the Matlab environment (The Mathworks, Natick, Massachusetts, United States) as previously described [48].

Supporting Information

Figure S1

Gene Expression Analysis in DRG Neurons of Er81EWS-Pea3 Mice

Analysis of TrkC expression by in situ hybridization (A and E), and Runx3 (red; B and F), Brn3A (red; C and G), Isl1 (red; D and H), p75 (red; I and M), TrkA (red; J and N), CGRP (red; K and O), Calretinin (CR; red; L and P), and LacZ (green; B–D and F–P) by immunohistochemistry on E16.5 lumbar DRG of Er81NLZ/+ (A–D and I–L) and Er81EWS-Pea3/− (E–H and M–P) embryos.

Scale bar: (A, B, E, F, L, and P), 70 μm; (C, D, G, H, I–K, and M–O), 75 μm.

(4.9 MB CDR).

Click here for additional data file.

Figure S2

Ia Proprioceptive Afferents Make Functional Connections with Motor Neurons in Er81EWS-Pea3 Mutants

(A and B) Representative traces from intracellular recordings measuring Ia afferent monosynaptic input to quadriceps motor neurons evoked by suprathreshold stimulation of the quadriceps nerve in wild-type (A) and Er81EWS-Pea3/− mutant (B) animals.

(C) Average monosynaptic amplitudes (± standard error of the mean) from all recorded cells (wild-type, n = 11; mutant, n = 8).

(20 KB CDR).

Click here for additional data file.

Figure S3

Generation of Mice Expressing EWS-Pea3 or mGFP in Early Post-Mitotic DRG Neurons

(A) Top panel shows organization of the Tau genomic locus in the region targeted by homologous recombination in analogy to Tucker et al. [41]. Exons 1–3 are shown as light blue boxes, and the Tau start codon in exon 2 is indicated as ATG. The probe used to detect homologous recombination is shown as a grey box. Middle and bottom panels show Tau locus after homologous recombination to integrate targeting cassettes (green) into exon 2 with coincident elimination the endogenous Tau start codon. The integrated targeting cassettes allow for conditional expression of EWS-Pea3 and NLS-LacZ (NLZ) (middle) or mGFP and NLS-LacZ (bottom) upon Cre-recombinase-mediated activation. In the absence of Cre recombinase, a transcriptional stop sequence flanked by loxP sites inhibits expression of the respective transgenes from their start codons (ATG in grey).

(B) Southern blot analysis of TauEWS-Pea3/+ and TaumGFP/+ genomic DNA to detect the mutant allele.

(C) In the presence of Cre recombinase, the transcriptional stop sequence in the cassettes integrated into the Tau locus is removed. Expression of EWS-Pea3 and NLS-LacZ (top) or mGFP and NLS-LacZ (bottom) can now occur in neurons coincidently expressing Cre recombinase and Tau (indicated as ATG in green).

(D–L) Expression of Isl1 (D, G, and J), EWS-Pea3 (E and H), GFP (K), or LacZ (F, I, and L), in E12 (D–I) or E13.5 (J–L) DRG neurons of wild-type (D–F), TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ (G–I), and TaumGFP/+ Isl1Cre/+ (J–L) embryos.

Scale bar: (D–F), 40 μm; (G–I), 35 μm; (J–K), 50 μm.

(1.5 MB CDR).

Click here for additional data file.

Figure S4

Generation of PVCre Mice

(A) Above is the organization of the PV genomic locus. Exons are schematically illustrated as light blue boxes, where exon 2 contains the start codon (ATG) and exon 5 contains the stop codon (STOP). Probe to screen for homologous recombination is shown as grey box. Below is a schematic diagram to show the PV locus after the integration of an IRES-Cre cassette (green) 3′ to the translational stop codon of PV using homologous recombination in ES cells.

(B) Southern blot analysis of PVCre wild-type (+/+) and heterozygous (+/−) genomic DNA using the probe indicated in (A).

(C and D) Expression of GFP (green) and LacZ (red; C) or PV (red; D) in P0 TaumGFP/+ PVCre/+ mice. Note that more than 90% of PV+ neurons coexpress GFP (D; data not shown).

Scale bar: (C and D), 50 μm.

(2 MB CDR).

Click here for additional data file.

Figure S5

Gene Expression Analysis upon Precocious Induction of EWS-Pea3 in DRG Neurons

Immunohistochemical analysis of PV (A and D), Calretinin (B and E), and Calbindin (C and F) expression on E16.5 lumbar DRG of wild-type (A–C) and TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ (D–F) embryos.

Scale bar: 80 μm.

(950 KB CDR).

Click here for additional data file.

Acknowledgements

The generation and initial characterization of Er81EWS-Pea3/− mice was performed in the laboratory of Thomas Jessell at Columbia University, with expert assistance from Barbara Hahn and Monica Mendelsohn. We thank Thomas Jessell for encouragement and many stimulating discussions and thank him and Pico Caroni for helpful comments on the manuscript. We thank Jean-Francois Spetz, Patrick Kopp, Bernard Kuchemann, and Monika Mielich for excellent technical assistance, Ina Kramer for providing Runx3 antibodies, Pico Caroni for providing mGFP cDNA, John A. Hassell for providing EWS-Pea3 cDNA and fruitful discussions on ETS gene function, and Y. A. Barde and K. Tucker for providing the Tau targeting construct. SH, EV, MS, TP, CL, DRL, and SA were supported by a grant from the Swiss National Science Foundation, by the Kanton of Basel-Stadt, and by the Novartis Research Foundation. In addition, DRL was supported by a research fellowship from the Roche Research Foundation.

Conflict of interest. The authors have declared that no conflicts of interests exist.

Abbreviations

DRG - dorsal root ganglion/ganglia

E - embryonic day

EWS - Ewing sarcoma

mGFP - membrane-targeted green fluorescent protein

NT-3 - neurotrophin 3

P - postnatal day

PV - Parvalbumin

spGFP - synaptophysin green fluorescent protein

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Replacement of Er81 by EWS-Pea3

(A) Generation of Er81EWS-Pea3 mutant mice. Above is the organization of the Er81 genomic locus in the region targeted by homologous recombination in analogy to [14]. Exons 1–4 are shown as light blue boxes, and the Er81 start codon in exon 2 is indicated as ATG. The probe used to detect homologous recombination is shown as a grey box. Below is replacement of Er81 by EWS-Pea3 through the integration of EWS-Pea3 in frame with the endogenous start codon of the Er81 locus in exon 2 (in analogy to [14]).

(B) PCR and Southern blot analysis of Er81EWS-Pea3 wild-type (+/+), heterozygous (+/−), and homozygous (−/−) genomic DNA to detect the mutant allele. PCR primer pairs (EWS-Pea3ki) were used to detect specifically the recombined allele, and a primer pair in exon2 was used to detect the presence of the wild-type allele [14].

(C–E) Analysis of Er81 expression in lumbar DRG neurons of E16.5 wild-type (C), Er81−/− (D), and Er81EWS-Pea3/− (E) embryos. Inset in lower right corner of each panel shows Isl1 expression in the respective DRG.

(F–H) PV expression in lumbar DRG of E16.5 wild-type (F), Er81−/− (G), and Er81EWS-Pea3/− (H) embryos. Confocal scans were performed with equal gain intensity.

(J) Transcriptional transactivation of luciferase expression from a minimal reporter construct containing five consensus ETS DNA-binding sites (GCCGGAAGC; [18,19]) and a minimal TK promoter upon transient transfection of Er81 (n ≥ 7; 3.03 ± 0.66) or EWS-Pea3 (n ≥ 7; 20.3 ± 2.7). Relative luciferase activity normalized to control (Con).

Scale bar: 80 μm.

Figure 2

Rescue of Ia Proprioceptive Afferent Projections into the Ventral Spinal Cord in Er81EWS-Pea3 Mutants

(A–F) Morphological analysis of central projections at lumbar level L3 of PV+ DRG neurons (A–C) or all DRG sensory afferents after application of fluorescently labeled dextran to individual dorsal roots (D–F) in P0.5 (A–C) or P5 (D–F) wild-type (A and D), Er81−/− (B and E), and Er81EWS-Pea3/− (C and F) mice. Red dotted line indicates intermediate level of spinal cord.

(G–I) Analysis of vGlut1 immunocytochemistry in the ventral horn of P0.5 wild-type (G), Er81−/− (H), and Er81EWS-Pea3/− (I) mice. Yellow dotted box in (A) indicates size of images shown in (G–I).

(J–L) Schematic summary diagrams of the morphological rescue of Ia proprioceptive afferent projections (blue) into the ventral spinal cord observed in wild-type (J), Er81−/− (K), and Er81EWS-Pea3/− (L) mice. DRG indicated by dotted grey line; motor neurons are shown in black.

Scale bar: (A–C), 150 μm; (D–F), 160 μm; (G–I), 70 μm.

Figure 3

Defects in the Establishment of Sensory Afferent Projections upon Precocious Expression of EWS-Pea3 in DRG Neurons

(A–C and G–I) Visualization of sensory afferent projections (green) into the spinal cord of wild-type (A–C) and TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ (G–I) embryos at E13.5 (A, C, G, and I) and E16.5 (B and H) by Cre-recombinase-mediated activation of mGFP expression from the Tau locus (A, B, G, and H) or by a Thy1spGFP transgene (C and I; [25]). Grey arrows indicate normal pattern of afferent projections into the spinal cord, whereas red arrows show aberrant accumulation of sensory afferents at the lateral edge of the spinal cord in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos.

(D–F and J–L) Analysis of sensory afferent projections (green) into the skin (D and J) or muscle (E and K; red, α-Bungarotoxin, BTX) of wild-type (D–F) and TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ (J–L) embryos at E16.5 by Cre-recombinase-mediated activation of mGFP (D, E, J, and K) expression from the Tau locus. (F and L) show Egr3 expression in intrafusal muscle fibers using in situ hybridization (consecutive sections to [E and K] are shown).

(M–Q) Analysis of bifurcation of sensory afferent projections towards the spinal cord in E13.5 wild-type (M) and TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ (O and Q) embryos after injection of fluorescently labeled dextran (green) into one DRG (lumbar level L3). Confocal scanning plane for (M and O) is schematically illustrated in (N). Inset in (O) is also shown at a deeper confocal scanning plane (P and Q) to visualize aberrant axonal projections.

Scale bar: (A and G), 60 μm; (B and H), 80 μm; (C and I), 100 μm; (D and J), 160 μm; (E, F, K, and L), 70 μm; (M, O, and Q), 240 μm.

Figure 4

Neurotrophin-Independent Neurite Outgrowth In Vitro of DRG Neurons Expressing EWS-Pea3 Precociously

E13.5 lumbar DRG from wild-type (A, B, and C), TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ (D, E, and F), or Bax−/− (G, H, and I) embryos cultured for 48 h without neurotrophic support (A, D, and G) or in the presence of NGF (B, E, and H) or NT-3 (C, F, and I) were stained for expression of neurofilament to visualize axonal extensions.

Scale bar: 130 μm.

Figure 5

DRG Neurons Expressing EWS-Pea3 Isochronically Depend on Neurotrophins for Survival

E14.5 lumbar DRG from TaumGFP/+ PVCre/+ (A and B) and TauEWS-Pea3/+ PVCre/+ (C and D) embryos cultured for 48 h without neurotrophic support (A and C) or in the presence of NT-3 (B and D) were stained for expression of neurofilament (red) and LacZ (green) to visualize axonal extensions and survival of PV-expressing proprioceptive afferents.

Scale bar: 150 μm.

Figure 6

Loss of Trk Receptor Expression and Increased Survival in DRG Neurons upon Precocious ETS Signaling

(A–C and G–I) In situ hybridization analysis of TrkA (A and G), TrkB (B and H), and TrkC (C and I) expression in E16.5 lumbar DRG of wild-type (A–C) and TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ (G–I) embryos.

(D–F and J–L) Analysis of lumbar DRG of wild-type (D), TaumGFP/+ IslCre/+ (E and F), and TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ (J, K, and L) embryos for (1) neuronal cell death at E13.5 by TUNEL (green; D and J), (2) cell survival and proliferation at E16.5 by LacZ (blue) wholemount staining (E and K; lumbar levels L1 and L2 are shown), and (3) BrdU (green)/LacZ (red) double labeling (F and L).

(M and N) Quantitative analysis (n ≥ 3 independent experiments) of the mean number of apoptotic events relative to wild-type levels is shown in (M) and neuronal survival in (N) as percent of wild-type of DRG at lumbar levels L1 to L5 as quantified on serial sections.

(O) Western blot analysis of protein extracts isolated from lumbar DRG of E16.5 wild-type (wt) and TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ (mut) embryos using the following antibodies: Akt, p-Akt (Ser473), CREB, p-CREB (Ser133), Bax, Bcl2, and Bcl-xl.

(P) Quantitative analysis of protein levels relative to wild-type in percent is shown on the right (n = 3 independent experiments).

Scale bar: (A–C and G–I), 35 μm; (D and J), 40 μm; (E and K), 200 μm; (F and L), 50 μm.

Figure 7

Gene Expression Analysis upon Induction of Precocious or Isochronic ETS Signaling

(A–H) Analysis of TrkC expression by in situ hybridization (A–D), or Calretinin (red) and LacZ (green) expression by immunohistochemistry (E–H), on E16.5 lumbar DRG of wild-type (A and E), TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ (B and F), Er81EWS-Pea3/− (C and G), and TauEWS-Pea3/+ PVCre/+ (D and H) embryos.

(I) Summary diagram illustrating deregulation of TrkC (red arrows, downregulation) and Calretinin (green arrows, upregulation) expression upon precocious (B and F) induction of EWS-Pea3 expression in DRG neurons (B and F; E10–E11, i.e., shortly after cell cycle exit, E9.5–E10). In contrast, activation of EWS-Pea3 from the endogenous Er81 locus (C and G; E12.5–E13) or via Cre recombinase expression from the PV locus activating late expression from the Tau locus (D and H; E14.5) does not interfere with the normal expression of TrkC and Calretinin (shown in grey).

Scale bar: (A–D), 65 μm; (E–H), 80 μm.

Figure 8

Precocious ETS Signaling Induces Gene Expression Changes Cell-Autonomously

(A–D) Expression of TrkA (A and C; green) or TrkC (B and D; green), and LacZ (red), in E16.5 lumbar DRG of TaumGFP/+ Hb9Cre/+ (A and B) and TauEWS-Pea3/+ Hb9Cre/+ (C and D) embryos.

(E–L) Expression of Calretinin (green), LacZ (red), and Isl1 (F, J, H, and L; blue) in E16.5 brachial (E–H) and lumbar (I–L) DRG of TaumGFP/+ Hb9Cre/+ (E, F, I, and J) and TauEWS-Pea3/+ Hb9Cre/+ (G, H, K, and L) embryos.

Scale bar: (A–D), 80 μm; (E–L), 70 μm.

Figure 9

Progressive Neuronal Specification Is Paralleled by a Developmental Shift in Response to ETS Transcription Factor Signaling

Schematic summary diagram illustrating the importance of temporally appropriate upregulation of transcription factor expression during specification of DRG neurons for late aspects of neuronal differentiation and circuit assembly.

(A–D) Expression of EWS-Pea3 from the endogenous Er81 locus can rescue anatomical defects observed in Er81−/− mice, and no change in expression of TrkC (green) or Calretinin (CR; grey) is observed in proprioceptive afferents (A, B, and D). In contrast, precocious ETS signaling leads to severe defects in the establishment of DRG neuronal projections accompanied by inappropriate gene expression changes (C; upregulation of CR (red) and downregulation of TrkC [grey]).

(E) Precocious ETS signaling (red) during progressive specification of proprioceptive sensory neurons leads to aberrant neuronal differentiation (red dashed line). In contrast, the isochronic, target-induced (green; peripheral signal) onset of ETS transcription factor signaling (black) induces appropriate terminal neuronal differentiation (blue).

Footnotes

Author contributions. SH and SA conceived and designed the experiments. SH, EV, MS, TP, CL, DRL, and SA performed the experiments. SA wrote the paper.

Citation: Hippenmeyer S, Vrieseling E, Sigrist M, Portmann T, Laengle C, et al. (2005) A developmental switch in the response of DRG neurons to ETS transcription factor signaling. PLoS Biol 3(5): e159.Ataxia and peripheral nerve hypomyelination in ADAM22-deficient mice

Abstract

Background

ADAM22 is a member of the ADAM gene family, but the fact that it is expressed only in the nervous systems makes it unique. ADAM22's sequence similarity to other ADAMs suggests it to be an integrin binder and thus to have a role in cell-cell or cell-matrix interactions. To elucidate the physiological functions of ADAM22, we employed gene targeting to generate ADAM22 knockout mice.

Results

ADAM22-deficient mice were produced in a good accordance with the Mendelian ratio and appeared normal at birth. After one week, severe ataxia was observed, and all homozygotes died before weaning, probably due to convulsions. No major histological abnormalities were detected in the cerebral cortex or cerebellum of the homozygous mutants; however, marked hypomyelination of the peripheral nerves was observed.

Conclusion

The results of our study demonstrate that ADAM22 is closely involved in the correct functioning of the nervous system. Further analysis of ADAM22 will provide clues to understanding the mechanisms of human diseases such as epileptic seizures and peripheral neuropathy.

Background

ADAM (A Disintegrin And Metalloprotease) is a family of membrane-spanning multi-domain proteins containing a metalloproteinase-like domain and a disintegrin-like domain. Currently, more than 30 ADAMs have been identified in mammals. Their biological activities implicate ADAMs in fertilization, myogenesis and neurogenesis by proteolysis and adhesion. Some types of ADAM are catalytically active metalloproteases and shed the extracellular domains of membrane-bound growth factors or receptors [1,2]. For example, ADAM17 (TACE) has been shown to cleave several substrates, including tumour necrosis factor alpha[3,4], heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor [6,7] and transforming growth factor alpha [8]. Studies of ADAM17-null mice have revealed that ADAM17 is critical in embryogenesis and plays an essential role in the supply of growth factors [6,8]. ADAMs are also involved in cell-cell or cell-matrix adhesion through their interaction with integrins or syndecans. More than 10 ADAMs have been shown to support integrin-mediated cell adhesion in vitro [9]. It has been reported that ADAM2-null and ADAM3-null male mutants are infertile and their spermatozoa lack egg-binding abilities [10-12]. Both ADAM2 and ADAM3 are not metalloproteases because they lack catalytic site sequences in their metalloprotease domain. These studies clearly showed that non-proteinase members of ADAMs also have significant roles in vivo.

We have reported the findings of ADAM11, ADAM22 and ADAM23 genes and their restricted expression in the human and murine nervous systems [13-15]. Sequence analysis suggests that they are not metalloproteases, since they all lack a catalytic motif. It has been reported that ADAM23 protein is localised to the cell surface [16], interacts with alpha-v beta-3 integrin heterodimer [17] and the disruption of ADAM23 gene in the mouse results in premature death associated with ataxia and tremor [18]. Although the cause of death in this mouse is unknown, for these phenotypes, impaired cell-cell or cell-matrix interactions in the nervous system caused by loss of ADAM23 may be responsible. ADAM22 and ADAM23 share highly homologous sequences in their extracellular domains. Especially, it is evident in their putative integrin binding loop sequences, CR(E/D)AVN(E/D)CD, which is located centre of the disintegrin domain. These findings led us to hypothesize that ADAM22 is an integrin binder and plays an important role in the nervous system, as does ADAM23. To determine the physiological functions of ADAM22, we generated and analysed Adam22 gene-targeted mice.

Results

Generation of ADAM22-deficient mice

Mice carrying a targeted mutation in their Adam22 gene were generated by homologous recombination (Fig. 1A). Correct targeting events were confirmed by Southern blot analysis (Fig. 1B). Since the termination codon was introduced in exon 8 in the pro-protein domain, only the truncated form of the ADAM22 protein would be synthesized from this targeted allele. Because a pro-protein domain is always removed in the mature functional ADAM-proteins by the Furin-like proteases and is thought to be non-functional itself, we considered that this truncated form of ADAM22 protein has no function. Absence of mature ADAM22 protein in homozygous mutants was confirmed by Western blot analysis using the specific antibody, which recognizes the cytoplasmic domain of the ADAM22 protein (Fig. 1C). Homozygous mutants showed no noticeable defects at birth and were indistinguishable from wild-type or heterozygous littermates during the first week. At postnatal day 10 (P10), most of the homozygous mutants were distinguishable by abnormalities such as reduced body weight and uncoordinated movements of their limbs. After P10, all homozygotes displayed severe ataxia (Fig. 2) and began to die. To measure the survival rate and body weight of each genotype precisely, we backcrossed heterozygous male mutants to C57BL/6 females more than 6 times. The resulting (N 6) heterozygous males and females were intercrossed and the produced offspring were analysed. The numbers of survivors of each genotype every 5 days are shown in Table 1. At P10, the ratio of each genotype was in close accordance with the Mendelian ratio (20.5% +/+, 55.1% +/-, 24.4% -/- ; n = 78). This result shows that ADAM22 is not essential for embryogenesis. At P10, the average body weight of homozygous mutants was approximately half that of wild-type and heterozygous littermates (Table 2). Homozygous mutants died one by one after P10, and all homozygotes died before P20. Of more than 100 homozygotes we have produced, none have survived more than 25 days after birth. Meanwhile, heterozygous mutants looked normal, were fertile, and survived for more than one year without obvious defects.

Histopathology of ADAM22-deficient mice

We have reported the predominant expression of ADAM22 mRNA in the human and mouse brain by Northern blot analysis [13,14]. To determine the distribution of ADAM22 transcript in the adult mouse CNS precisely, in situ hybridisation analysis was performed using 35S-labeled RNA probe. As shown in Fig. 3, ADAM22 mRNA was expressed throughout the adult mouse CNS. Strong signal was detected in the cerebellar granule cells and hippocampal formation. In the spinal cord, hybridisation signal was restricted to the grey matter. The distribution of ADAM22 transcripts in the CNS was quite similar with that of ADAM11, whose neuronal expression has been reported [19]. These results suggest that the ADAM22 mRNA expression is neuronal in the mouse CNS.

Based on the mRNA distribution pattern, we performed immunohistopathological analysis of the cerebellum and hippocampus extensively. Despite the high level of expression of ADAM22 mRNAs in the cerebellar granule cells, granule cell layer was normally formed and Purkinje cell morphology (calbindin-staining) of the mutant mouse looked intact (Figs. 4A–D). Hippocampal formation was also normally formed (Figs. 4I–J). These results suggest that neuronal cell migration was not impaired in the mutant mouse. Myelin-formation detected by MBP (myelin basic protein) staining of the mutant in the cerebellum (Fig. 4H) and spinal cord (Fig. 4L) was also indistinguishable with the wild-type littermate (Figs. 4G,K). In summary, we could not find any signs of abnormalities in the mutant mouse brain by the light microscopic examination.

Next, the spinal cord and peripheral nerves of each genotype were analysed by toluidine blue stain, which reveals myelin formation. Surprisingly, lack of myelin or thin myelin was observed in the sciatic nerves (Fig. 5B) and trigeminal nerves (Fig. 5D) in homozygous mutants. Because no lesions were observed in the spinal cord (Fig. 5F), it was suggested that Schwann cell specific myelination defect occurred in the homozygous mice. To analyse the state of myelinating Schwann cells and axons, electron microscopic (EM) analysis of the sciatic nerve was performed (Fig. 6). Schwann cells formed thin or no myelin in the homozygous mutant (Fig. 6B). In contrast, heterozygous mice showed complete myelination (Fig. 6A). Morphology of the axons looked normal in each genotype. Immunohistochemical analysis of the sciatic nerve showed that increased number of nuclei (Fig. 7B) and reduced staining of MBP (Fig. 7D) were remarkable in the homozygous mutant. The Schwann cell marker, S100 staining signal was intensely observed in the homozygote as well as wild-type (Figs. 7E, F). These results suggest that proliferation of the Schwann cells was not impaired but differentiation is severely delayed in the ADAM22-deficient mice.

Novel ADAM22 transcript variants isolated from the peripheral nervous system

In the case of human ADAM22, isolation of five splicing variants and existence of two terminating exons have been reported [13,20,21]. However, the latter terminating exon (exon 31) of the mouse species has not been identified yet. To isolate the long form of mouse ADAM22 transcripts, at first, we sought the mouse genome by BLAST homology search. Search results showed that the mouse genome contig NT_039297 contained most of the mouse Adam22 gene. In this contig sequence, we found putative exons 30 and 31, those sequences were quite similar to human ADAM22 isoform 1 (GenBank # NM_021723). To confirm existence of transcripts, we designed primers on the putative exon 31 and performed RT-PCR using mouse cerebellum mRNA as a template. TA-cloning of the amplified fragments and sequencing analysis showed that 5 of 8 clones were type 1 isoform (G01), 2 clones were type 3 isoform (G03) and 1 clone (G08) contained a novel exon between exons 29 and 30. Next, we performed RT-PCR analysis of mRNAs purified from several adult mouse tissues, such as the spinal cord, dorsal root ganglion (DRG), sciatic nerve and cultured primary Schwann cells. Interestingly, multiple DNA fragments were amplified from each tissue (Fig. 8), and length of major fragments in each lane was different. For example, length of major amplified PCR fragments from the sciatic nerve (Fig. 8A, lane 5) and cultured Schwann cells (lane 6) were almost identical, and were shorter than those from other tissues. In contrast, major fragments from the DRG (lane 4) were longer than others. We performed TA-cloning and sequencing to analyse exon organization of the amplified transcripts (Fig. 8C). Forty seven clones were isolated in total and were classified in 16 independent clones (G01 – G23). Comparison with the genomic sequence revealed the existence of 8 novel exons (exons 27S, 27L, 29.1, 29.3, 29.5, 29.7, 30 and 31). These novel exons were flanked by well-defined introns that obey the GT-AG rule. Exon organization of each clone was shown in Fig. 8C. Characteristic feature of ADAM22 transcripts is tissue specific insertion or skipping of exons. Because the number of nucleotides of exons 26, 27, 27L, 29.3, 29.5 and 29.7 is a multiple of 3, insertion or skipping of these exons will not change the downstream reading frame. Known peptide motives were not found in the newly isolated sequences. This RT-PCR analysis is summarized as follows: ADAM22 transcripts were roughly subdivided in 3 groups, CNS-form (containing exon 27), DRG-form (containing exon 27L) and Schwann-cell-form (skipping exon 26 and 27). From these results, we concluded that ADAM22 is expressed in a cell-type specific manner, and plays an essential role in myelinogenesis in the PNS.

Discussion

In the present study, we examined the function of ADAM22 by generating mice that lacked the Adam22 gene. ADAM22-deficient mice exhibited severe ataxia and premature death. In contrast, heterozygous mutants were healthy, fertile and survived more than 1 year without obvious abnormalities. The cause of death in the homozygous mutants is not clear; however, it is likely to be due to multiple seizures. This is because convulsive seizures were occasionally observed in homozygotes, after which the suffered mice appeared exhausted and, in most cases, died on the next day. It is known that cortical dysplasia resulting from aberrant brain development causes seizure syndrome [22]. For example, mice lacking the neuron-specific activator of cyclin 5, p35, exhibit seizures and a severe neuronal migration defect [23]. Because ADAM22 protein is expressed on the cell surface and is likely to be involved in cell-cell or cell-matrix interactions, we hypothesized that depletion of ADAM22 would generate aberrant neuronal migration. Histochemical analysis was performed to verify this hypothesis. However, no marked abnormalities were observed in the mutant mouse brain, ruling out a critical role for ADAM22 in neuronal migration. Another possible explanation is that the premature death in first 2 weeks of life is caused by the dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system. Especially, nerves which control the breathing would be very important, because the respiration system undergoes significant maturation in the first 2–3 weeks after birth. For example, the myelin-deficient (MD) rat, which carries a point mutation in the proteolipid protein (PLP) gene, exhibits ataxia, tremor, dysmyelination and dies at approximately postnatal day 21. In MD rat, early death is caused by the dysfunction of the brain stem which is essential for autonomic control of respiration during hypoxia [24]. Further study is needed to verify the cause of death in ADAM22-deficient mice.

Another interesting phenotype observed in ADAM22-deficient mice was hypomyelinogenesis. Histopathological analysis revealed marked hypomyelination in the sciatic and trigeminal nerves. However, myelin formation in the spinal cord and the brain was normal. It was therefore evident that hypomyelinogenesis occurred specifically in the peripheral nerves in the knockout mice, suggesting Schwann cell dysfunction. In the mutant sciatic nerve, the density of pro-myelinating Schwann cells (S100-positive, MBP-negative) was markedly higher than that seen in heterozygotes. Higher pro-myelinating Schwann cell density and marked delay in myelin formation indicate that ADAM22 plays an important role in Schwann cell differentiation, but not in proliferation.

Investigations on why hypomyelinogenesis occurred in ADAM22-deficient mice centre on integrin. This is because several ADAMs have been shown to interact with integrins via disintegrin domains [9], and it has been suggested that alpha-6 beta-1 integrin on the Schwann cell plays an important role in myelin formation [25]. In addition, laminin-2 is a key player in peripheral myelin formation, because laminin-2 deficiency causes dysmyelination in mice and humans, and its receptors, alpha-6 beta-1 integrin and dystroglycan, are also shown to be deeply involved in myelin formation [26,27]. The conditional knockout studies of beta-1 integrin and laminin gamma-1 in Schwann cell suggested that both laminin-2 and integrins are essential for segregation of large bundles of axons in the early stage of myelin formation [25,28]. In contrast, the phenotype seen in the ADAM22-deficient mice was quite different: for example, unsorted bundles of axons were not seen in nerves and roots. We assume that ADAM22 partially modulates integrin-mediated signals or is involved at a later stage of myelin formation.

Conclusion

In summary, we generated ADAM22-deficient mice and proved that ADAM22 plays an essential role in both the CNS and the PNS. The results of this study suggest that ADAM22 is involved in human diseases such as epilepsy and peripheral neuropathy. The human ADAM22 gene is relatively large, at 300 kb in length, and is comprised of more than 30 exons. It is assigned on 7q21, where several chromosomal aberrations that are accompanied by neurological disorders have been identified [29,30]. Further detailed molecular function analysis of ADAM22 may lead to progress in uncovering the mechanisms that underlie certain human neurological diseases.

Methods

Construction of an Adam22 gene-targeting vector

The 18-kb genomic DNA fragments covering exons 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the Adam22 gene were amplified from C57BL/6 genomic DNA by PCR using Expand Hi-Fidelity enzyme mix (Roche Diagnostics) and primers designed for each exon. To generate a mutation in the mouse Adam22 gene, we inserted the PGKneo cassette into exon 8 of the Adam22 gene. The final targeting construct consisted of a 10.5-kb genomic DNA fragment that was interrupted by the insertion of the PGKneo cassette and contained a MC1/TK cassette as a negative selection marker against random integration [5].

Generation of Adam22 deficient mice

The linearised targeting vector was electroporated into TT2 embryonic stem (ES) cells [31]. Homologous recombinants were selected by PCR. The extracted genomic DNA from each clone was amplified using the forward primer AGN2: 5'-GCCTGCTTGCCGAATATCATGGTGGAAAAT-3' in the PGKneo cassette, and the reverse primer MFP065R: 5'-ACTATTTCTGTGATGAGGGCACAGCATC-3' outside the targeting vector. Homologous recombined DNA was efficiently amplified by 35 cycles of the following amplification steps (94°C-30 s and 68°C-5 min). The targeting efficiency of this construct was about 4%. Correctly targeted ES clones were injected into fertilized ICR mouse eggs at the eight-cell stage. The resulting male chimeras were mated with C57BL/6N females, and heterozygous male and female mice were interbred to generate homozygous mice. The ataxic phenotypes of homozygous mice were observed in two independent lines.

Southern blot analysis

Mouse genomic DNA used for Southern blot analysis was extracted from the liver of each genotype. BamHI-digested genomic DNA was probed with the [32P]-labelled 0.4-kb SpeI-BamHI genomic fragment, which is located between exons 8 and 9.

Antibody production

His-tagged and MBP-fused recombinant protein containing cytoplasmic domain (cp) of human ADAM22 isoform 1 (position: 756–906, 151 amino acids in length) were produced in E. coli. His-tagged ADAM22-cp protein was purified in denatured condition using Ni-NTA resin (Qiagen GmbH) and dialysed in PBS. Precipitated protein was recovered and was mixed with Freund's complete adjuvant (Invitrogen), then, the mixture was used for immunization of rabbits. The antiserum raised against the His-tagged ADAM22-cp protein was incubated with MBP-fused ADAM22-cp protein coupled to Affi-Gel 10 beads (Bio-Rad). Beads with bound antibodies were washed in PBS, and the bound antibodies were eluted with 100 mM glycine, pH 3.0, and neutralized immediately. Using the affinity purified antibody, both human and mouse ADAM22 proteins were detected by Western blot analysis. However, unfortunately the antibody was not suitable for immunohistochemical analysis of mouse tissues.

Western blot analysis

The absence of ADAM22 protein in the Adam22 -/- mice was confirmed by Western blot analysis. Briefly, the cerebellum was isolated from a P14.5 mouse of each genotype and homogenized with a Polytron homogenizer in cell lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, Complete protease inhibitors [Roche Diagnostics]). After removal of cell debris by centrifugation, the supernatant was separated on 10% SDS-PAGE, and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The blot was then incubated with polyclonal antibody against the cytoplasmic domain of ADAM22 (at 1:1,000). Bound antibodies were visualized with horseradish peroxidase-labelled second antibody and a ECL-plus chemiluminescence detection system (Amersham Biosciences Corp.).

Primary Schwann cell culture

Primary Schwann cells were prepared from 4-month-old C57BL/6 mice according to Manent's protocol [32] with minor modifications. Briefly, sciatic nerves were removed and incubated for 7 days in the pre-treatment medium, which consisted of D-MEM (high glucose) supplemented with 10% FCS, 50 mg/ml gentamicin (Invitrogen Corp.), 2.5 μg/ml fungizone (Invitrogen Corp.), 2 μM forskolin (EMD Biosciences Inc.) and 10 ng/ml recombinant heregulin-beta1 (R&D Systems). For dissociation, cultured sciatic nerves were cut into pieces and incubated at 37°C for 3 hours in Opti-MEM medium (Invitrogen Corp.) containing 130 U/ml collagenase type I (Invitrogen Corp.) and 0.4 U/ml dispase II (Roche Diagnostics). Dissociated cells were resuspended in the pre-treatment medium and plated on Poly-D-Lysine/Laminin coated plate (BD Biosciences). The purity of the cultured Schwann cells, as determined by indirect immunofluorescence analysis, approached 90 %.

RT-PCR analysis

Adult C57BL/6 male mice were used in this study. Total RNAs purified from the cerebellum, spinal cord, sciatic nerve, DRG and cultured Schwann cells using TRIzol (Invitrogen Corp.) and RNeasy kit (Qiagen GmbH) were analysed by RT-PCR using SuperScript II and random primer (Invitrogen Corp.), and PCR amplification (40 cycles; 94°C-30 s, 60°C-30 s and 68°C-5 min) with Expand Hi-Fidelity DNA polymerase (Roche Diagnostics) and ADAM22-specific primers. To detect splicing variants in the cytoplasmic domain, a forward primer was placed just upstream of the transmembrane domain and a reverse primer was set on the terminating exon. The primers used in this study were as follows. ISH04-forward: 5'-AACAGGCACTGGACAGGGGCTGAC-3' and ISH04-reverse: 5'-AATGGATGTCTCCCATAGCCTGGC-3'.

Histopathology

Mice were anesthetized with ethyl ether. Whole-body perfusion by 2% paraformaldehyde-glutaraldehyde solution followed by heparin-included saline was performed. Sciatic nerves, trigeminal nerves, brain and spinal cord were removed and fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin. The spinal cord and other nerve blocks were washed and postfixed with 2% osmium tetroxide, and were dehydrated in ethanol and equilibrated in Epon. Epon embedded semithin sections were stained with toluidine blue and were subjected to light microscopic examination. For electron microscopic analysis, thin sections were cut using an ultramicrotome, stained with 1.5% uranylacetate in 50% ethanol and 0.8% lead citrate, and analysed using electron microscope. All procedures were conducted according to the Eisai Animal Care Committee's guidelines.

Immunohistochemistry

Frozen sections were rinsed in 0.1% Triton X-100/PBS at room temperature for 1 hour, and were blocked in BLOCKACE solution (Dai-nippon). The following antibodies were incubated overnight in 0.1% BLOCKACE at 4°C:

monoclonal mouse anti-calbindin 28 K (Sigma, 1:200); monoclonal mouse anti-MBP (SMI-99, Sternberger Monoclonals Inc., 1:50); monoclonal mouse anti-Neu N (CHEMICON, 1:100); rabbit anti-S100 polyclonal (DAKO, 1:200). Nuclei were counterstained with 1 μg/ml DAPI (Sigma). MBP staining was performed after microwave epitope retrieval in 10 mmol/L citrate buffer (pH 6). Sections were incubated for 1 hour with secondary antibodies: Cy3-labeled donkey anti-rabbit IgG (Jackson Immuno Research, 1:200), FITC-labelled donkey anti-mouse IgG (Jackson Immuno Research, 1:200). Sections were photographed with an Olympus microscope (Olympus IX71) equipped with a high-resolution CCD camera.

RNA in situ hybridisation

In situ hybridisation on frozen sections were carried out using 35S-labelled RNA probes. Briefly, 610 bp of mouse ADAM22 cDNA (position: 1351–1960 from initiating ATG) was cloned into the pBluescript II SK(+) or the pBluescript II KS(+) vector. Using these plasmids as templates, sense and antisense labelled RNA probes were generated by T7 RNA polymerase and [α35S]UTP. Frozen brain and spinal cord from 2 month-old C57BL/6 female mice were used in this analysis. Pretreatment, hybridisation, RNase treatment and washing was carried out following the protocol described in the literature [33]. Dehydrated slides were attached to imaging plates for 48 hours and the autoradiograms were analysed using a Bio-Image Analyser (BAS3000, Fuji Photo Film).

Authors' contributions

KS is leading this project, and performed cDNA cloning, plasmid construction, antibody production, immunohistochemical study, and wrote the manuscript. KH and JK conducted histopathological experiments. TH analysed mRNA distribution by in situ hybridisation. ET, NM, MI, TO and KY contributed to the generation of knockout mice. TN supervised the project. All authors read and approved the manuscript.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Isao Tanaka, Masayuki Okada, Yoshiharu Mizui, Kappei Tsukahara, Hiroyuki Kato, Hiroo Ogura and Junro Kuromitsu (Eisai Co., Ltd.), and Shin-ichi Murase (Virginia University) for the fruitful discussions and advice.

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Targeted mutation of Adam22. (A) The genomic structure of the wild-type Adam22 allele (top), the targeting construct (middle) and the disrupted allele (bottom) are shown. ADAM22 expression was disrupted by the insertion of a termination codon and a PGKneo cassette into exon 8. An MC1/TK cassette at the end of the targeting vector allows for negative selection. The 3' probe represents the position of the external probe used for Southern blot analysis, and expected BamHI [B] fragments are indicated by arrows. (B) Southern blot analysis of mouse genomic DNA. The expected DNA fragments for the wild-type allele and disrupted allele are 7.5-kb and 2.5-kb, respectively. +/+, wild-type; +/-, heterozygote; -/-, homozygote. (C) Western blot analysis of ADAM22 expression in the mouse cerebellum. Absence of ADAM22 protein in the Adam22 (-/-) mutant cerebellum was shown using anti-ADAM22-cp (cytoplasmic domain) polyclonal antibody.

Figure 2

Uncoordinated movements in the Adam22 (-/-) mice at postnatal day 18 (P18). (A) Adam22 (-/-) mice were smaller than their wild-type (+/+) littermates. (B, C) Adam22 (-/-) mice at P18 were unable to support themselves on their hindlimbs.

Figure 3

Neuronal ADAM22 mRNA expression in the CNS. To determine the ADAM22 mRNA distribution, in situ hybridisation analysis using 35S-labeled probe was performed. Coronal (A, B) and sagittal (C, D) sections of the mouse brain and spinal cord (E) were shown. Using the antisense probe (A, C), strong signals were obtained, especially in the hippocampus and the cerebellum, while no signals was detected by the sense probe (B, D). In the spinal cord, autoradiograms of ADAM22 mRNA was detected in the grey matter (E).

Figure 4

Normal neurodevelopment in the CNS of ADAM22-deficient mice. Sagittal sections of the cerebellum from wild-type mice (A, C, E, G) and homozygous mutants (B, D, F, H) at postnatal day 13 were stained for calbindin (C and D; green) or MBP (G and H; green), and were counterstained with DAPI (A, B, E, F; blue). Significant abnormalities were not observed in the homozygotes. Hippocampal neurons were stained by anti-Neu N antibody (I and J). Spinal myelin was analysed by MBP staining (K and L). These analyses showed no obvious differences between homozygotes (J, L) and wild-type littermates (I, K). Bar: (A, B, E, F) 100 μm, (K, L) 250 μm.

Figure 5

Hypomyelination of peripheral nerves in ADAM22-deficient mice. Epon embedded semithin cross-sections of the sciatic nerves (A, B), the trigeminal nerves (C, D) and the spinal cord [lateral funiculus] (E, F) of the indicated genotypes at postnatal day 10 were stained with toluidine blue. Note that the ADAM22-deficient mouse shows thin myelin or lack of myelin in the peripheral nerve fibres (B, D), but the spinal myelinated fibres are intact (F).

Figure 6

Electron microscopic analysis of sciatic nerves. Electron micrographs of the sciatic nerves from Adam22 +/- (A) and Adam22 -/- (B) mice at postnatal day 10 are shown. In the heterozygote (A), thick myelin was formed, while no myelin was formed in the ADAM22-deficient mouse (B). The axons looked normal in each genotype.

Figure 7

Marked delay in differentiation of the mutant Schwann cells. Transverse sections of the sciatic nerves of the indicated genotypes at postnatal day 13 were stained for MBP (C and D; green) or S100 (E and F; red), and were counterstained with DAPI (A, B; blue). In the mutant sciatic nerve, density of DAPI-signals were greatly increased (B) compared with those of the wild-type (A). Bar: (A, B) = 50 μm.

Figure 8

Adam22 gene structure and tissue specific transcripts. (A) RT-PCR analysis. Amplified DNA fragments were analysed by 1 % agarose gel electrophoresis. Lanes 1. 100 bp DNA ladder; 2. cerebellum; 3. spinal cord; 4. dorsal root ganglion; 5. sciatic nerve; 6. cultured Schwann cells; 7. distilled water (B) Exon organization of the mouse Adam22 gene is illustrated. Boxes indicate exons. The G01 transcript (orthologous to the human ADAM22 isoform 1 transcript) is composed of grey boxes. Boxes in black indicate non-coding region. (C) Summary of the isolated clones. The nucleotide sequence data have been deposited with the DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank Data Libraries under the accession numbers described in the table. (D) Number of clones isolated from each tissue is summarized. Cb; cerebellum, Sp; spinal cord, DRG; dorsal root ganglion, SN; sciatic nerve, cSC; cultured Schwann cells.

Table 1

Genotyping of the progeny of Adam22 heterozygous intercrosses.

From heterozygous intercrosses, 78 mice were produced. Numbers of mice in each genotype were counted on postnatal day 10, 15 and 20. No homozygotes were survived more than postnatal day 20. +/+, wild-type; +/-, heterozygote; -/-, homozygote.

Table 2

Body weight of progeny at postnatal day 10.5

+/+, wild-type; +/-, heterozygote; -/-, homozygote.DNA binding and helicase actions of mouse MCM4/6/7 helicase

Abstract

Helicases play central roles in initiation and elongation of DNA replication. We previously reported that helicase and ATPase activities of the mammalian Mcm4/6/7 complex are activated specifically by thymine-rich single-stranded DNA. Here, we examined its substrate preference and helicase actions using various synthetic DNAs. On a bubble substrate, Mcm4/6/7 makes symmetric dual contacts with the 5′-proximal 25 nt single-stranded segments adjacent to the branch points, presumably generating double hexamers. Loss of thymine residues from one single-strand results in significant decrease of unwinding efficacy, suggesting that concurrent bidirectional unwinding by a single double hexameric Mcm4/6/7 may play a role in efficient unwinding of the bubble. Mcm4/6/7 binds and unwinds various fork and extension structures carrying a single-stranded 3′-tail DNA. The extent of helicase activation depends on the sequence context of the 3′-tail, and the maximum level is achieved by DNA with 50% or more thymine content. Strand displacement by Mcm4/6/7 is inhibited, as the GC content of the duplex region increases. Replacement of cytosine–guanine pairs with cytosine–inosine pairs in the duplex restored unwinding, suggesting that mammalian Mcm4/6/7 helicase has difficulties in unwinding stably base-paired duplex. Taken together, these findings reveal important features on activation and substrate preference of the eukaryotic replicative helicase.

INTRODUCTION

DNA helicases couple the hydrolysis of nucleotide or deoxynucleotide triphosphate to duplex unwinding (1). Coordination of a set of subactivities including nucleotide binding, DNA binding and ATP hydrolysis is required for unwinding of duplex DNA (1,2). The hexameric helicases, to which minichromosome maintenance (Mcm) helicase belongs, are known to assemble a ring-like structure (3–5). Whereas most of DNA helicases of this group, including simian virus 40 large T-antigen (6), Escherichia coli DnaB (7) and Archaeal Mcm (4,8,9), are composed of a single subunit, the active eukaryotic Mcm helicases are composed of two trimeric Mcm4/6/7 proteins (10–14).

All the six Mcm 2–7 proteins contain highly conserved DNA-dependent ATPase motifs in their central regions (15,16). Among the several stable subcomplexes which MCM proteins can generate, only the Mcm4/6/7 complex has been shown to possess an intrinsic DNA helicase activity (10–14,17–18). While Mcm4, Mcm6 and Mcm7 proteins make distinct contribution to its helicase activity (11–13), Mcm2 or Mcm3/5 inhibit the helicase activity of the Mcm4/6/7 complex by converting its double trimer structure into a heterotetramer or heteropentamer, respectively (3,11). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays and genetic characterization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae strongly suggested that Mcm is involved not only in initiation but also in the DNA chain elongation stage as a replicative helicase (19,20). Consistent with this notion, the processivity of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe and mouse Mcm4/6/7 complexes is significantly stimulated on forked DNA structures and it can unwind duplex DNA of 400–500 bp (13,14). Mcm4/6/7 binds to fork and bubble structures in an ATP-dependent manner, and generates a double-hexameric complex, as was shown for T-antigen (13,14,21). Recently, we reported that the helicase and ATP hydrolysis activities of mammalian Mcm4/6/7 are specifically activated by single-stranded DNA containing stretches of thymine residues and proposed a novel model that Mcm may play a crucial role in selection of replication origins in higher eukaryotes (13).

In this report, in order to clarify the mode of action of the Mcm helicase and obtain insight into how it may function at the replication forks in vivo, we have conducted detailed analyses of helicase action and DNA binding of mouse Mcm4/6/7 helicase using various forked and bubble substrate DNAs. We specifically addressed sequence requirement for the Mcm helicase activation, mode of interaction with DNA substrates and whether the thymine sequences are required for continuous activation of Mcm helicase during the unwinding process. The results indicate that mammalian Mcm4/6/7 primarily binds to single-stranded DNA region, and that the extent of helicase activation is related to the thymine content of the single-stranded segment. Unexpectedly, Mcm4/6/7 helicase is not capable of efficiently unwinding the GC-rich duplex segment, suggesting that some other mechanism may be required for completion of replication of the entire genome.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Reagents

Labeled and unlabeled dNTPs/rNTPs and Sequenase were purchased from Amersham Pharmacia. M13mp18 and M13mp19 single-stranded circular DNA, T4 polynucleotide kinase, DNase I and the Klenow fragment were from TAKARA, Nuclease P1 was from Roche, and anti-FLAG M2 Ab (antibody)-agarose and FLAG peptide were from Sigma. SV40 T-antigen was purified from baculovirus-infected insect cells as reported (22). PriA helicase protein was provided by Dr Taku Tanaka (23). Oligonucleotides were purchased from Hokkaido system science Co., Ltd (Hokkaido, Japan), and were purified on polyacrylamide gel, followed by purification by Sep-Pak Plus C18 cartridge column (Waters).

Expression and purification of mouse Mcm4/6/7 complex

The recombinant baculoviruses expressing His6-Mcm4/Mcm6 or Mcm7-FLAG proteins were previously described (11). Sf9 and High five insect cells were cultured at 27°C in Sf-900 II SFM (Life Technologies, Inc.) and EX-CELL 405 medium (JRH Biosciences), respectively. For expression of the Mcm4/6/7 proteins, High five cells were coinfected with recombinant baculoviruses expressing the His6-Mcm4/Mcm6 proteins and those expressing the Mcm7-FLAG, and were collected at 48 h post-infection. The recombinant Mcm4/6/7 complexes were purified as previously described (12).

DNA substrates

The sequences for all the oligonucleotides used for constructions of DNA substrates are listed in Tables 1 and 2. The partial heteroduplex substrates were constructed by annealing labeled oligonucleotides with M13mp18 single-stranded circular DNA or its derivative. The labeled substrates were purified by Sepharose CL4B column chromatography (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech).

The DNA bubble substrates were assembled from two partially complementary oligonucleotides with top and bottom strand sequences (Table 1). T-tailed Y-fork substrates were prepared by annealing two oligonucleotides (dT30 and dT60 series). To construct the arrested fork and 3′- or 5′-extension substrates, various combinations of oligonucleotides shown in Table 1 were annealed. Bub-82/lamin B2 containing the T-rich strand of the lamin B2 origin region was constructed as previously described (13). The bubble substrate, c-myc/DUE or c-myc/DUE-C, contains sequences (GenBank accession number K01908) from nucleotides 722 to 853 or those from 828 to 747 (complementary strand), respectively, in the central melted region. For each substrate, labeled oligonucleotide (3 pmol) was annealed with the unlabeled oligonucleotide (6 pmol) in a reaction mixture (50 μl) containing 20 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM MgCl2 and 25 mM NaCl, which were heated to 95°C, kept at 67°C for 1 h, and then allowed to slowly cool down to 37°C. The assembled substrates were purified from polyacrylamide gel by elution into TE buffer (24).

The partial heteroduplex substrates on a single-stranded circular DNA with varied lengths of duplex regions were prepared by extending DNA chains from the 3′ end of the dT40-37mer (37mer region hybridizing at positions 6289–6326 of M13mp18 vector) annealed to the single-stranded circular DNA. DNA chains were elongated with Sequenase in the presence of [α-32P]dGTP, followed by extension after addition of ddGTP and all four dNTPs, resulting in substrates containing labeled duplex regions of varied lengths (13). The substrate (5 fmol) was first incubated with indicated amount of the Mcm4/6/7 complex at 37°C for 1 h in reaction mixture as described (11), and then reactions were stopped by addition of EDTA (20 mM), SDS (0.1%) and 2 μg proteinase K, followed by incubation for 20 min. Aliquots were electrophoresed on a 6.5% polyacrylamide gel in 1× TBE at 300 V for 2.5 h. The single-stranded circular DNAs used were M13mp18 and M13mp19+G-rich. The latter was constructed by inserting a G-rich repeat sequence (GGGGCGTGGGC)6, prepared by annealing of two oligonucleotides (5′-GATCC-[GGGGCGTGGGC]6-3′/5′-GATCC-[GCCCACGCCCC]6-3′) at the BamHI site of M13mp19 and the sequences of the insert were confirmed.

DNA helicase and gel shift assays

In gel shift assays, Mcm4/6/7 proteins were incubated at 30°C for 30 min in reaction mixtures (15 μl) containing 25 mM HEPES–NaOH (pH 7.5), 50 mM sodium acetate, 10 mM Mg(CH3COO)2, 1 mM DTT, 0.25 μg/ml BSA, 0.5 mM ATP-γ-S and labeled substrates of the amount indicated. After addition of 2 μl of 50% glycerol, the reaction mixtures were directly applied on a polyacrylamide gel containing 6 mM magnesium acetate and 5% glycerol in 0.5× TBE, and electrophoresis was conducted at room temperature. For DNA helicase assays, the reaction mixtures of the gel shift assays, as described above, were incubated at 30°C for 15 min, and then the ATP was added at 10 mM, followed by incubation at 37°C for additional 30 min. The reactions were terminated by addition of EDTA (20 mM), SDS (0.1%) and 2 μg proteinase K, and were incubated for additional 15 min. The samples were separated by electrophoresis on nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel in 1× TBE.

Nuclease protection assays

The reaction mixtures (25 μl) contained 25 mM HEPES–NaOH (pH 7.5), 50 mM sodium acetate, 10 mM Mg(CH3COO)2, 1 mM DTT, 0.25 mg/ml BSA, 0.5 mM ATP-γ-S, 0.5 mM CaCl2, 10 fmol of 32P-labeled bubble substrate, and the indicated amount of Mcm4/6/7 proteins. After incubation at 30°C for 30 min, the indicated amount of DNase I (TAKARA Biomedical, Japan) was added, and the mixtures were incubated at room temperature for 1 min. DNase I was inactivated by the addition of 250 μl of stop solution (20 mM EDTA, 0.2M sodium chloride, 1% SDS and 12.5 μg/ml yeast RNA). For nuclease P1 footprinting assay, binding reactions were carried out under the same conditions except that CaCl2 was omitted. P1 nuclease (0.3 U, Roche) was added and incubation was continued at 37°C for 1 min. Cleavage was stopped by addition of 50 μl of 25 mM EDTA and 0.4 M NaOH; the mixture was incubated at room temperature for 10 min followed by the addition of 12 μl of 3 M sodium acetate (pH 4.8). Proteins were removed by phenol–chloroform extraction, and DNAs were collected by ethanol precipitation followed by wash with 70% ethanol. The digested DNA was subjected to electrophoresis through a 10 or 12% polyacrylamide sequencing gel containing 7 M urea, followed by autoradiography.

RESULTS

Mcm4/6/7 complex primarily interacts with the single-stranded DNA segment

Mcm4/6/7 binds to ‘bubble’ DNA substrates and unwinds the duplex segments when the central single-stranded segment contains thymine stretches (13). In order to examine the mode of binding of Mcm4/6/7 on bubble DNAs, we conducted nuclease protection assays using labeled bubble substrate DNAs and Mcm4/6/7 in the presence of ATP-γ-S which permits binding to substrate DNA but does not mobilize the helicase. At an optimum concentration of DNase I, strong cleavages were detected on the 21 bp duplex regions at both ends of the substrates, whereas weaker cleavages were detected on the central single-stranded region, consistent with preference of DNase I to double-stranded DNA. With the Bub66/T-rich substrate, strong protection was detected on the entire single-stranded regions of both top and bottom strands with increasing concentration of Mcm4/6/7, consistent with high affinity of Mcm4/6/7 to T-rich bubble sequences (Figure 1A). Similar, but less significant protection was detected on the single-stranded DNA segment with P1 nucleases (Figure 1A), which is specific to single-stranded DNA. The results indicate that the Mcm complex is loaded onto bubble DNA through binding to both strands of the single-stranded region. Careful examination of Mcm4/6/7 footprints on a bubble indicated strong protection on the 5′-half of the top strand and moderate protection on the remaining 3′-half, as well as on several base-pair duplex segment adjacent to the branch point (Figure 1A and data not shown). A similar pattern of protection was observed also on the bottom strand. This suggests that Mcm4/6/7 may bind to a replication bubble substrate with a 2-fold symmetry as a double hexamer (Figure 1A, see the lower scheme), in a manner similar to SV40 T-antigen (21).

Nuclease protection assays were conducted also on a T-tailed Y-fork structure (Figure 1B). Not only the single-stranded tail region but also the 7 bp duplex DNA adjacent to the duplex-to-single-strand junction were protected by Mcm binding from DNaseI digestion. These results indicate that Mcm4/6/7 protein primarily interacts with single-stranded DNA region and that the interaction also spans the duplex segments near the branchpoint of the replication fork.

Formation of double hexameric Mcm4/6/7 complexes facilitates helicase actions on bubble substrates

The above results suggest that Mcm4/6/7 generates a double hexameric complex on a bubble, each hexamer of which makes symmetric contact with the 5′-proximal central single-stranded segment. This predicts that the single-stranded segment needs to be of a sufficient length in order to accommodate the Mcm complex. In fact, we previously showed that the Mcm4/6/7 mainly forms a single hexameric complex on bubble-20 (a bubble substrate with 20 nt long central single-stranded segment) and a double hexameric complex on bubble-60 DNA (13). In order to determine the minimum requirement for double-hexamer formation, a set of synthetic bubble-like substrates (Bub-T10, Bub-T20, Bub-T30, Bub-T40 and Bub-T50) that differed in the length of the central unpaired segment were constructed, and the binding and helicase activities of Mcm4/6/7 on these substrates were examined. Mcm4/6/7 was incubated with a radiolabeled synthetic bubble substrate in the presence of 0.5 mM ATP-γ-S to allow complex formation. A half of these reaction mixtures were analyzed for DNA binding in gel shift assays (Figure 2A), and the remainder was further incubated in the presence of 10 mM ATP to measure DNA helicase activity (Figure 2B). Bub-10 generated only a low level of complexes with Mcm4/6/7, and Bub-20 generated primarily a single mobility-shifted form, which may contain a single hexamer of Mcm4/6/7. On Bub-30, significant amount of complexes containing a double hexamer were generated in addition to those containing a single hexamer (Figure 2A) (13,21). The amounts of double hexamer complexes increased on Bub-T40 and Bub-T50 with concomitant decrease of single hexamer complexes (Figure 2A). The results indicate that a single-stranded segment of at least 40 nt long is required for efficient loading of the double-hexameric Mcm helicase on a bubble substrate.

In DNA helicase assays, Mcm4/6/7 complex did not show helicase activity on either Bub-10 or Bub-20 substrate. The efficiency of displacement slightly improved as the length of the single-stranded segment increased up to 30 nt. On Bub-T40 and Bub-T50, on the other hand, significant displacement was observed, indicating that a single-stranded segment of at least 40 nt long is required for efficient helicase actions on bubble substrates (Figure 2B). Taken together, the above results are consistent with the notion that the Mcm4/6/7 complex, loaded onto DNA as a double hexameric complex, efficiently unwinds the duplex region of the substrate DNA.

Both strands of thymine-rich single-stranded segments are required for efficient unwinding of bubble DNA by Mcm4/6/7

Symmetric binding of the Mcm4/6/7 double hexamer to bubble suggests that each hexamer catalyzes unwinding of one of the two duplex segments. We asked whether activation of both hexamers is required for unwinding of the bubble substrate. The preferred bubble substrate which is efficiently unwound by Mcm4/6/7 contains thymine stretches on both strands of the single-stranded segment. We constructed a hetero-bubble (Bub66/T–G-rich) in which one strand is T-rich (same as Bub66/T-rich) and the other strand is G-rich (same as Bub66/G-rich) (13), and helicase assays were conducted with increasing amount of Mcm4/6/7. Only weak unwinding was detected on this substrate compared to Bub66/T-rich (Figure 3A). Since Mcm4/6/7 can bind to Bub66/T–G-rich and forms a double hexameric complex (data not shown), the defective unwinding is not due to inefficient loading of the helicase onto the substrate. If one hexamer interacting with the thymine-rich strand dissociates from the other hexamer and displaces only one of the duplex segments, then it would result in generation of Y-fork structures which could not be further displaced due to the presence of G-rich 3′-tail and would appear on the gel. However, we did not detect such intermediates during the course of the experiment (Figure 3B), suggesting that bubble can be displaced efficiently only when two molecules of the Mcm4/6/7 hexamers are simultaneously activated.

Binding and helicase actions of Mcm4/6/7 on forked and 3′- or 5′-extension substrates

In order to examine more precisely the interaction and helicase actions with forked substrates, Y-fork substrates containing a nascent leading strand (A-fork[3′]), nascent lagging strand (A-fork[5′]), or both of them (A-fork[3′,5′]), as well as 5′-extension or 3′-extension structures were constructed. Mcm4/6/7 bound to A-fork[3′] or A-fork[5′] with affinity similar to that of a simple Y-fork (Figure 4A and data not shown). In contrast, PriA helicase, used as a control, bound to A-fork[3′] more efficiently than to A-fork[5′], as reported previously (23,25). Mcm4/6/7 bound also to 5′-extension and 3′-extension, albeit with slightly reduced affinity compared to A-fork[3′] and A-fork[5′] (Figure 4A). Mcm4/6/7 bound to A-fork[3′,5′] with much lower affinity, and the complex gave rise to a single band. These findings indicate that the Mcm4/6/7 complex is loaded onto DNA preferentially and efficiently through single-stranded region, regardless of the presence of 3′- or 5′-terminus.

In contrast, only the substrate containing a 3′ single-stranded DNA tail (A-fork[5′]) was efficiently unwound and A-fork[3′] or A-fork[3′,5′], was not unwound by Mcm4/6/7 (Figure 4B). Absence of helicase actions on A-fork[3′,5′] composed only of duplex regions is expected since double-stranded DNA is not able to activate the ATPase activity of Mcm4/6/7 (10). In contrast, the PriA, a structure-specific helicase used as a control, binds at the fork junction and unwinds the fork and the nascent lagging strand DNA on A-fork[5′], or unwinds the nascent lagging strand on A-fork[3′,5′], as reported before (25). These results indicate that the Mcm4/6/7 complex binds to single-stranded DNA and that its helicase is activated only in the presence of a single-stranded 3′-tail.

3′-extension with poly(dT) tail is displaced by Mcm4/6/7

It has been reported that the 3′-extension can be unwound by the archaeal Mcm homohexamer but not by fission and budding yeast Mcm complexes (14,26,27). We have constructed 3′-extension substrates containing poly(dT), poly(dA), poly(dC) and poly(dG) 3′-tails in order to examine whether mouse Mcm4/6/7 can displace these substrates. We first found that Mcm4/6/7 binds to dT-, dC- and dG-3′-extension with similar affinity, and to dA-3′-extension with much lower affinity (Figure 5A). This is consistent with the previous results that Mcm4/6/7 binds to 50mer oligo-dT, -dC and -dG, but not to a 50mer oligo-dA (13). We found that dT-tailed 3′-extension was displaced efficiently by Mcm 4/6/7 while almost no or very little activity was detected on other substrates (Figure 5B and C). This is in sharp contrast to yeast Mcm4/6/7 helicases which are not capable of unwinding 3′-extension substrates. Furthermore, dT-tailed 5′-extension, to which Mcm4/6/7 could bind, was not displaced by the Mcm helicase. The addition of the 5′-tail to dT-tailed 3′-extension further stimulated the displacement (Figure 5D), confirming the previous report that the fork structures facilitate the helicase action. Thus, these results further strengthen our conclusion that the mammalian Mcm helicase is generally activated by the thymine-stretch on the 3′-single-stranded tail.

The effects of the thymine content of the 3′-tail on Mcm helicase activity

We next examined more systematically the effect of the compositions of the thymine residues of the 3′-tail on the Mcm helicase activity. A partial heteroduplex M13 single-stranded DNA containing a 37 bp duplex region in the presence or absence of the 50 nt long 3′-tail of various nucleotide compositions were constructed and the unwinding by mouse Mcm4/6/7 was examined (Figure 6A). Due to its low processivity, Mcm4/6/7 barely displaced the annealed 37mer oligonucleotide without a 3′-tail (37mer; Figure 6A). Only weak helicase activity was observed on the substrate carrying the 3′-tail of 25 repeats of TA dinucleotide (37-TA25; Figure 6A), whereas strong helicase activity was observed on 37-TTA17. Increase of thymine content on the 3′-tail did not further increase the extent of unwinding (37-TTTA13, 37-TTTTA10 and 37-T50; Figure 6A), suggesting that 17 repeats of TT dinucleotides (67% thymine) may be sufficient for activation of Mcm helicase. It should be noted that the TA25 tail would self-anneal and this would prevent the loading of Mcm, since the 3′-tail containing TTAA13 or TTTAAA8 did not enhance the unwinding either (data not shown). Therefore, we next examined the effects of repeating sequences of thymine and cytosine (Figure 6B). Partial heteroduplex substrates containing the 3′-tail of TC25, TTCC13, TTTCCC8, TTTTCCCC6, TTCC17 were displaced by the Mcm4/6/7 complex to the extent similar to that achieved by TTA17, suggesting that 50% thymine content is sufficient for full activation of Mcm helicase. TTCC13 and TTCC17 were displaced to a similar extent, consistent with the earlier result that a 40 nt tail is sufficient for activation (13). However, the efficiency of the displacement significantly decreased as the thymine content of the 3′-tail dropped to 33%, as in TAA17 or TCC17 (Figure 6B and C). Thus, the minimal thymine content required for activation of the Mcm helicase may be somewhere between 33 and 50%.

DUE sequences from the c-myc origin activate Mcm helicase

Our previous studies have shown that the sequences containing periodic (dT)n tracts derived from the human lamin B2 origin (48% thymine content) can serve as an efficient activator for the Mcm helicase on a bubble, and replacement of thymines with guanines abolished the helicase activation (13,28). In order to examine other natural replication origins with different thymine contents for the ability to activate Mcm helicase on a bubble substrate, we constructed new bubble substrates, Bub82/c-myc, containing sequences derived from the DUE (DNA unwinding element) region of the human c-myc origin which is essential for c-myc replicator activity (29,30). The unpaired segment in Bub82/c-myc/DUE contains one strand of DUE and that in Bub82/c-myc/DUE-C contains another strand. This DUE is believed to coincide with the initially unwound region of the c-myc origin (29), and its deletion substantially reduced the replicator activity (30). Mcm4/6/7 unwound Bub82/lamin B2 (thymine 48%), Bub82/c-myc/DUE (37%) and Bub82/c-myc/DUE-C (39%) with similar efficiency (Figure 7A), indicating that the sequences from the c-myc origin also can serve as efficient activators of the Mcm helicase. This result also indicates that sequences with 37% thymine content can activate Mcm4/6/7 to displace 24 nt duplex on both sides in a bubble substrate, suggesting that the not only thymine content but also the sequence context may affect the Mcm helicase activation.

In gel shift assays, MCM4/6/7 bound to all the three bubbles, although the affinity to Bub82/c-myc/DUE and to Bub82/c-myc/DUE-C is slightly lower than that to Bub-82/lamin B2 (Figure 7B). Therefore, helicase and DNA binding activities do not necessarily correlate with each other. This was also indicated by our previous results that guanine and cytosine stretches can bind to Mcm but cannot activate the helicase (13).

DNA unwinding by Mcm4/6/7 is inhibited by the GC-rich sequences on the duplex segment

Our results indicate that thymine-rich single-stranded DNA is required for initial loading and activation of the Mcm helicase. However, it is not known whether thymine sequences are required for processive unwinding of duplex DNA. Therefore, we have examined whether the nucleotide composition of the duplex region affects its unwinding activity. To address this issue, we constructed a series of T-tailed Y-fork structures (T-fork) containing various sequences in the duplex segment. They carried varied contents of cytosine residues on the 3′-tail strand. In gel shift assays, Mcm4/6/7 bound to these Y-fork substrates with identical affinity (Figure 8A), consistent with the notion that the Mcm4/6/7 binds to single-stranded tails. However, in DNA helicase assays, T-fork/(C:G)49 was hardly displaced by Mcm4/6/7, but was readily displaced by SV40 T-antigen DNA helicase (Figure 8B). When thymine or adenine is inserted as every third nucleotide (repeats of CCT or CCA), the extent of unwinding increased (T-fork/(CCT:GGA)16 and T-fork/(CCA:GGT)16). The efficiency of unwinding is roughly correlated with the content of GC pairs in the duplex segment [T-fork/(CCAA:GGTT)12, T-fork/(CCTT:GGAA)12, T-fork/(CAAA:GTTT)12 and T-fork/(CTTT:GAAA)12; Figure 8B]. It appears that the duplex segment containing <50% GC pairs is efficiently unwound (Figure 8C).

We next examined the effect of GC-rich segments on a partial heteroduplex DNA on a single-stranded circular DNA. We have constructed two sets of 5′-tailed partial heteroduplex DNA substrates containing duplex regions of variable lengths; one on M13mp18 vector and the other on M13mp19 containing a 66 nt long G-rich segment downstream of the hybridizing oligonucleotide. We found that the Mcm4/6/7 helicase can displace duplex DNA up to 350 nt long on its own on the former substrate (Figure 8D, left), consistent with previous results (13). In contrast, displacement was inhibited over the GC-rich segments on the latter substrate (Figure 8D, right panel), although displacement up to 250 nt in length, albeit at a reduced level, was observed at a high concentration of Mcm4/6/7 complex. This result is consistent with that on Y-fork and indicates that GC-rich duplex segment is inhibitory for unwinding by the Mcm helicase. These results may indicate that the presence of thymine–adenine pairs with a certain frequency in the duplex region may facilitate continuous unwinding by Mcm4/6/7. Alternatively, Mcm4/6/7 is not efficient enough to displace thermodynamically stable GC-base-paired segment.

In order to distinguish these two possibilities, we designed a new T-fork substrate containing inosine (I) residue instead of guanosine residue. The thermal stability of the I:C base pair is lower than that of the G:C base pair in duplex DNA due to loss of one hydrogen bond and is even lower than A:T base pair (31). We constructed the T-tailed fork substrates containing the (GCC:CGG)10, (GCC:CIG)10 or (GAA:CTT)10 duplex DNA segment (Figure 8E). Mcm4/6/7 hardly displaced the 31 nt long duplex of GCC:CGG repeats, whereas the T-fork/(GAA:CTT)10 was displaced efficiently, as described above. T-fork/(GCC:CIG)10 was displaced with efficiency much greater than that of T-fork/(GCC:CGG)10, indicating that the thermostability of the duplex segment, not the lack of AT base pair, is responsible for inability of Mcm4/6/7 to displace the duplex.

DISCUSSION

DNA helicase is a central factor for operation of replication forks. It also plays a crucial role in the initiation step at the replication origins. Therefore, the elucidation of how the replicative helicases interact with DNA substrate and how they are activated is crucial for understanding the molecular basis of initiation of DNA replication. It is now believed that Mcm is a major component of the eukaryotic replicative helicase. In this report, we have conducted detailed analyses on binding and helicase actions of mouse Mcm4/6/7 using various substrates including fork and bubble structures.

Modes of binding and activation of Mcm4/6/7 helicase on a bubble structure

Initiation of DNA replication is associated with localized melting of duplex DNA near replication origins. Helicases are loaded onto replication forks through the melted region, induced by initiator binding, in bacteria (32). We previously reported that Mcm4/6/7 can be loaded onto a bubble-like structure and can serve as a DNA helicase at the forks (13). The ability of Mcm4/6/7 to unwind the bubble substrate but not the conventional duplex DNA (Figures 2 and 13) indicates that Mcm can be loaded through the single-stranded segment of the bubble. Furthermore, the Mcm4/6/7 complex displays marked preference for thymine-rich sequences within the single-stranded segment for helicase activation (13). The results in this report indicate that helicase action of Mcm4/6/7 on synthetic bubbles may depend on the presence of an unpaired region of sufficient length (at least 40 nt), which may permit assembly of a double-hexameric complex on the substrate DNA, similar to SV40 T-antigen protein (Figure 2A) (21). When one strand of the single-stranded segment in T-rich bubble was replaced by guanine-rich sequences, the efficiency of unwinding was significantly reduced.

Our footprinting analyses showed that Mcm4/6/7 strongly protects 25 nt single-stranded DNA segment adjacent to each branch point and proximal to 5′ ends of both strands of the bubble. At each fork, one Mcm4/6/7 complex is likely to encircle the single-stranded DNA strand and two hexamers may bind symmetrically to the bubble substrate, forming a double hexameric structure on the bubble (see schematic drawing of Figure 1A). Efficient unwinding into both directions may require simultaneous activation of both hexamers which may sit at the center while extruding the unwound single-stranded DNA through the rings. This may closely resemble the proposed modes of binding and helicase actions of T-antigen (21). Although we cannot totally exclude the possibility that one Mcm4/6/7 hexamer at each fork unwinds the duplex independently, ring-shaped structures of mouse and archea MCM, as revealed by electron microscopy, bear much similarity to the recently solved structure of the SV40 large T-antigen (4,6), and are in favor of the double-hexameric structure of mouse Mcm on a bubble DNA.

Substrate and sequence requirement for Mcm4/6/7 helicase activation

DNA binding assays indicate that Mcm4/6/7 binds to those substrates containing single-stranded DNA regions regardless of the presence or absence of single-stranded 3′ or 5′ end. Unwinding of the duplex DNA depends on translocation of single-stranded DNA from 3′ to 5′ direction. This is most clearly shown by its helicase action on A-fork[5′] and 3′-extension but not on A-fork[3′], A-fork[3′,5′] nor 5′-extension. However, it does not necessarily require 3′ end of single-stranded DNA, since Mcm4/6/7 can displace annealing oligonucleotide on a circular single-stranded DNA. The ability of the mouse Mcm4/6/7 to unwind 3′-extension is shared by the archaeal Mcm helicase but not by Mcm4/6/7 from S.pombe and S.cerevisiae (14,26,27). The archaeal Mcm can unwind A-fork[3′] but eukaryotic Mcm4/6/7 cannot, since the former binds to double-stranded DNA but the latter does not (5,27). While yeast Mcm helicases can translocate on duplex DNA, such activity was not observed with mammalian Mcm4/6/7 (data not shown).

Occurrence of AT-rich sequences, with asymmetric distribution of adenine and thymine, near the replication origins, lead us to propose that Mcm may play a role in selection of initiation sites of mammalian DNA replication, and prompted us to examine the ability of sequences from human replication origins to activate Mcm4/6/7 helicase. Both lamin-B2 and c-myc origins served as efficient activator for Mcm helicase in vitro. Consistent with it, site-specific loading of Mcm in the DNA replication initiation zone of the c-myc was recently reported (33).

We have examined in detail the effect of sequence context of the single-stranded DNA on the helicase activity of Mcm. The results indicate that thymine content of 50% is sufficient for the maximum helicase activity. The efficiency of displacement decreased as the thymine content of the 3′-tail dropped to 33% (Figure 6). The stretches of thymine residues may not be necessarily required, since repeats of TC dinucleotides served as a potent activator for Mcm4/6/7. We also noticed that the presence of a secondary structure within the single-stranded DNA is inhibitory for helicase action. Nuclease footprinting assays indicated that binding was interfered by the secondary structure (data not shown). Thus, we have concluded that Mcm4/6/7 helicase is most efficiently activated by non-structured single-stranded DNA with thymine content of 50% or more, although significant stimulation is observed also by DNA with less thymine content (Figure 7), suggesting that the sequence specificity for Mcm helicase activation is rather relaxed and that the extent of the activation may depend on the sequence context. This would be reasonable given the flexibility and differential regulation of site selection for initiation of DNA replication during development or in various cell types, as well as the variability in initiation potential of each replication origin on the genome even within the single cell type.

Mcm4/6/7 helicase during processive unwinding at the fork

The specific requirement of single-stranded thymine residues for activation of Mcm helicase prompted us to examine whether they are required also for processive unwinding of duplex DNA. Our results indicated that increase of GC pair in the duplex segment significantly inhibited the Mcm helicase activity. Duplex DNA composed only of GC pairs (10 repeats of CGG) on a Y-fork was not displaced at all, while the same template was readily displaced by SV40 T-antigen (Figure 8B). Mcm helicase was inhibited by the presence of GC-rich duplex segment also on a circular single-stranded partial heteroduplex substrate. However, on this substrate, Mcm4/6/7 was able to displace DNA past the GC-rich region, albeit to a limited extent, when it was added at a high concentration. On the partial heteroduplex template, Mcm is loaded onto the circular single-stranded DNA of 6.4 kb, while it is loaded onto the 50 nt long 3′-tail DNA on the Y-fork. Thus, the difference of helicase actions may reflect the efficiency of Mcm loading. Alternatively, the presence of ‘random’ sequence at the initially unwound duplex segment in the former template may engage the Mcm helicase in a more active conformation which can displace the GC-rich duplex segment.

On Y-fork substrates, increase of AT base pairs in the duplex (10 repeats of CTT) restored the unwinding. These results indicate either that thymine residues are required on the duplex DNA for continuous unwinding, or that Mcm4/6/7 is simply not efficient enough to unwind the stable GC pairs. Replacement of the central guanosine with inosine in the CGG repeat duplex DNA resulted in displacement (Figure 8E) (31), suggesting that the continuous presence of AT base pair may not be essential for the Mcm helicase function and that the thermostability of GC base pairs is inhibitory for helicase action of Mcm4/6/7.

The results described in this manuscript reveal potentially important features of mammalian Mcm4/6/7 helicase, which is likely to be a key component of the eukaryotic replicative helicase. Prior to initiation of DNA replication, Mcm helicase may adopt a double hexameric complex at the partially melted origin region, and may catalyze concurrent unwinding of duplex DNA into both directions, while stably associated with the origins of DNA replication. This is similar to the T-antigen model originally proposed by Smelkova and Borowiec (21). We propose that, only when both hexamers are activated by the interacting thymine-rich sequences present within the melted region, the Mcm helicase is mobilized and initiation takes place. A crucial question is how these double hexameric helicase complexes are generated and turn into active helicases at the origins. This process would involve melting of duplex DNA, which may be facilitated by binding of preRC components in the context of proper chromatin structures, or by other unwinding factors including a topoisomerase or a newly identified Mcm8 helicase (34–36). It may also require association of fork-assisting proteins such as Cdc45 (37,38) as well as phosphorylation events by Cdk and Cdc7 kinases (39,40). One unexpected finding of this study is low helicase activity of Mcm4/6/7 on GC-rich duplex DNA. This, in conjunction with the low processivity of Mcm4/6/7 helicase, strongly indicates that the replicative helicase at the replication forks would require more than Mcm4/6/7 complex. During the processive unwinding of duplex DNA replication forks, Mcm4/6/7 may be further stimulated by interaction with other proteins, including remaining Mcm subunits, Cdc45 (37,38), GINS (41,42), DNA polymerase subunits (43), Mcm8 (35,36), etc. to become a truly processive and potent helicase capable of replicating the entire genome.

Acknowledgements

We thank Dr Taku Tanaka for preparations of some of the substrate DNAs used in this study and for useful suggestions, and also the members of our laboratory for helpful discussion. This work was supported in part by grants-in-aid for scientific research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (MEXT) awarded to Z.Y. and H.M. Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was provided by MEXT.

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.

Figures and Tables

Figure 1

Nuclease protection analyses of binding of Mcm4/6/7 protein to synthetic bubble and fork substrates. (A) The Bub66/T-rich substrate (4 fmol), the top strand or bottom strand of which were 32P-labeled at the 5′ end, were incubated with 0 (lane 1), 25 ng (lane 2), 50 ng (lane 3) or 75 ng (lane 4) of Mcm4/6/7 protein. Reaction mixtures were then treated with 0.11 U of DNase I or 0.3 U of nuclease P1. (B) The T-tailed Y-fork/random substrate (4 fmol) was incubated with 0 (lane 1), 15 ng (lane 2), 30 ng (lane 3), 60 ng (lane 4) or 120 ng (lane 5) of Mcm4/6/7 protein, and then treated with 0.037 U of DNase I or 0.3 U of nuclease P1. The reaction products were separated on denaturing PAGE. Single-stranded and duplex regions of the substrates used in the assays are indicated along the gel. In (A), top and bottom strands are indicated by boldface and normal lines, respectively. Regions of strong and moderate protection are indicated by bold and normal gray lines, respectively, along the substrate structure. The drawing at the bottom of (A) shows summary of the protection pattern (protected regions indicated by gray bold lines) and predicted binding modes of the double hexameric Mcm4/6/7 (shown by pale gray ovals) on the bubble substrate. The star marks represent the radioactive 5′ ends of the annealed oligonucleotides. M, radiolabeled 10 and 50 bp ladder.

Figure 2

Binding and helicase actions of mouse Mcm4/6/7 on bubble substrates containing single-stranded segments of varied lengths. Gel shift (A) and DNA helicase (B) assays were performed with mouse Mcm4/6/7 on synthetic bubble DNAs (4 fmol), Bub-T10, Bub-T20, Bub-T30, Bub-T40 and Bub-T50 (Table 1). Lanes 1–4 contain 0, 25, 50 and 100 ng of Mcm4/6/7 protein, respectively. B, boiled substrate. The drawing in (A) shows a schematic representation of the substrates used. The asterisk indicates 32P-labeled 5′-terminus.

Figure 3

Effect of the loss of thymine-rich sequences from one single-strand of the T-rich bubble on unwinding by Mcm4/6/7. (A) The Mcm4/6/7 helicase activity was measured by using bubble DNA substrate (4 fmol) containing an unpaired segment of two thymine-rich sequences (Bub66/T-rich) or that containing thymine- and guanine-rich sequence on each strand (Bub66/T–G-rich). The drawings under the panels show schematic representations of the substrates used in this assay. B, boiled substrate; lane 1, no protein; lanes 2–4 contain 25, 50 and 100 ng of the Mcm4/6/7 complex, respectively. (B) Helicase assays were conducted with Mcm4/6/7 (50 ng) on the bubble substrates indicated for various time. Quantification of displaced substrates is presented in the graphs.

Figure 4

DNA binding and helicase actions of Mcm4/6/7 on various fork substrates. (A) Gel-shift assays were conducted with Mcm4/6/7 on specific fork and extension substrates (3 fmol) as indicated. (B) DNA helicase assays were conducted on various substrates (3 fmol) used in (A). The amounts of Mcm4/6/7 added were 0 (lane 1), 25 (lane 2), 50 (lane 3) and 100 ng (lane 4). Lane 5, PriA helicase at 10 nM. B, boiled substrate. The drawings show schematic representation of the substrates used in the assays. Arrows a–d indicate displaced products, and their structures are indicated below the panel. The positions of the complexes containing a single hexamer or double hexamer are indicated. In the schematic drawings of the substrates, the labeled oligonucleotides are shown as bold lines, and the asterisks indicate 32P-labeled 5′-termini.

Figure 5

DNA binding and helicase actions of Mcm4/6/7 on 5′- and 3′-extension substrates. DNA-binding (A) and helicase (B) activities of Mcm4/6/7 were examined on various 3′-extension substrates (4 fmol) as shown. (C) Quantification of the displaced substrates in (B). (D) DNA helicase assays on 5′-extension, 3′-extension and Y-forked substrates. Lanes 1–4 are reactions with 0, 25, 50 and 100 ng of the Mcm4/6/7 complex, respectively. Schematic drawings of the substrates used in the assays are also shown. The star marks indicate 32P-labeled 5′-termini.

Figure 6

The effects of the nucleotide compositions of the 3′-tail on displacement of partial heteroduplex substrates by Mcm4/6/7. (A) DNA helicase assays were performed with 3′-tailed partial heteroduplex helicase substrates (on a single-stranded circular DNA; 4 fmol) carrying various nucleotide sequences in the 3′-tail as shown. The asterisks represent the 32P-labeled 5′ ends of the annealed oligonucleotides. (B) DNA helicase assays were performed with similar sets of partial heteroduplex helicase substrates carrying the 3′-tails as shown. (C) Quantification of displaced oligonucleotides in (B). Lanes 1–4 contain 0, 25, 50 and 100 ng of the Mcm4/6/7 complex, respectively. B, boiled substrate.

Figure 7

Activation of Mcm4/6/7 DNA helicase by sequences derived from the human c-myc origin. (A) DNA helicase assays of Mcm4/6/7 were conducted using Bub-82 bubble substrates (6 fmol) containing c-myc/DUE, Lamin B2 and c-myc/DUE-C sequences in the unpaired segment, the thymine contents of which are 48, 37 and 39%, respectively. Quantification of displaced substrates is presented in the graph. (B) DNA binding of Mcm4/6/7 was examined in gel shift assays using the same set of substrates. Lanes 1–4 are reactions with 0, 25, 50 and 100 ng of the Mcm4/6/7 complex, respectively. B, boiled substrate.

Figure 8

Effect of nucleotide compositions of the duplex segments on helicase action of Mcm4/6/7. DNA binding (A) and helicase (B, D and E) activities of the Mcm4/6/7 helicase were examined on various Y-fork DNAs (3 fmol) carrying different nucleotides in the duplex region as shown (A, B and E) or on single-stranded circular partial heteroduplex DNA substrates (5 fmol) (D). (A, B and E) Lane 1, no protein added; lanes 2–4 contain 25, 50 and 100 ng of the Mcm4/6/7 protein, respectively; lane 5 [in (B)], 50 ng of SV40 T-antigen. (C) Quantification of the displaced substrates in (B). (D) Helicase assays on dT40-Nmer/M13mp18 and dT40-Nmer/M13mp19 + G-rich carrying the labeled duplex regions of varied lengths. Lane 1, no protein added; lanes 2–7 contain 25, 50, 75, 125, 200 and 300 ng of the Mcm4/6/7 protein, respectively. Lanes 8 and 9, boiled M13mp18 and M13mp19 + G-rich substrates, respectively. The drawings show schematic representations of the substrates used in the assays. The red segment in bold face in (D) indicates the 66 nt long G-rich segment. The asterisks represent radiaoactive [α-32P]dGTP incorporated into the duplex segment or 32P-labeled 5′ ends of the annealed oligonucleotides. M [in (D)], denatured 50 bp ladder DNA marker; and I [in (E)], inosine. B, boiled substrate.

Table 1

Constructions of helicase substrates used in this study

The numbers with ‘#’ refer to oligonucleotides whose sequences are given in Table 2.

Table 2

List of oligonucleotides used in this studyPotential genetic modifiers of the cystic fibrosis intestinal inflammatory phenotype on mouse chromosomes 1, 9, and 10

Abstract

Background

Although cystic fibrosis is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, the severity of disease is highly variable indicating the influence of modifier genes. The intestines of Cftr deficient mice (CF mice: Cftrtm1Unc) are prone to obstruction by excessive mucus accumulation and are used as a model of meconium ileus and distal intestinal obstruction syndrome. This phenotype is strongly dependent on the genetic background of the mice. On the C57Bl/6 background, the majority of CF mice cannot survive on solid mouse chow, have inflammation of the small intestine, and are about 30% smaller than wild type littermates. In this work potential modifier loci of the CF intestinal phenotype were identified.

Results

CF mice on a mixed genetic background (95% C57Bl/6 and 5% 129Sv) were compared to CF mice congenic on the C57Bl/6 background for several parameters of the intestinal CF phenotype. CF mice on the mixed background exhibit significantly greater survival when fed dry mouse chow, have reduced intestinal inflammation as measured by quantitative RT-PCR for marker genes, have near normal body weight gain, and have reduced mucus accumulation in the intestinal crypts. There was an indication of a gender effect for body weight gain: males did not show a significant improvement at 4 weeks of age, but were of normal weight at 8 weeks, while females showed improvement at both 4 and 8 weeks. By a preliminary genome-wide PCR allele scanning, three regions were found to be potentially associated with the milder phenotype. One on chr.1, defined by marker D1Mit36, one on chr. 9 defined by marker D9Mit90, and one on chr. 10, defined by marker D10Mit14.

Conclusion

Potential modifier regions were found that have a positive impact on the inflammatory phenotype of the CF mouse small intestine and animal survival. Identification of polymorphisms in specific genes in these regions should provide important new information about genetic modifiers of the CF intestinal phenotype.

Background

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene [1]. Different mutations have a range of effects on the levels of CFTR protein and its proper functioning in epithelial transport of Cl- and HCO3- [2,3]. The severity of the pancreatic phenotype in human CF is well correlated with the extent of impaired CFTR function caused by specific mutations. Loss of CFTR function results in destruction of the exocrine tissue and eventual pancreatic insufficiency. On the other hand, the effects of CF on organs including the airways and intestines is less well correlated with specific CFTR mutations and their effects on CFTR protein function [4-8]. This indicates that other genes are likely to be important as modifiers of the CF phenotype.

With the exception of pancreatic insufficiency resulting in impaired digestion, other aspects of CF are less readily related to loss of CFTR function. Nutritional problems can persist even with adequate oral enzyme supplementation [9] and neutralization of gastric acid to improve lipase function [10], and may involve both impaired digestion and absorption of nutrients [11]. Inadequate absorption or assimilation of nutrients appears to be of greater importance because even with adequate oral enzyme supplementation nutrition is rarely fully corrected [11]. There is also excessive mucus accumulation in the CF intestine, and inappropriate inflammation is common [12]. Mucus is involved in obstruction of the gut which occurs frequently in CF infants (called meconium ileus, MI) and adults (called distal intestinal obstruction syndrome, DIOS) [11,13]. And, similar to CF airways, there is also an inflammation of the CF intestines [14,15]. These changes are less directly related to specific mutations in the CFTR gene and are likely related to other differences in individual genetic makeup.

Previous work using human patients and genetically altered mice has identified some modifier genes and have advanced our understanding of CF pathophysiology [4]. In one study using CF mice on different genetic backgrounds, a region on mouse chromosome 7 was shown to ameliorate intestinal blockage and the effect was in part due to a calcium-regulated Cl-channel which compensated for loss of CFTR function [16,17]. Marker haplotypes of the syntenic region of human chromosome 19q13 were also shown to be associated with the risk of MI in CF patients [18]. In other work, a region on mouse chr. 6 was strongly associated with lung inflammation, consisting of mononuclear cell interstitial infiltration and fibrosis in CF mouse airways; and other loci on chr. 1, 2, 10, and 17 were also linked to the airway phenotype [19].

In this work, CF mice on a mixed strain background were found to have a less severe CF phenotype compared to CF mice congenic on the C57Bl/6 background. There were no differences in the pancreatic phenotype comparing CF mice on the different backgrounds [20]. However, mice on the mixed background seemed more robust than CF mice on the B6 background which prompted us to characterize them in greater detail. Genome wide allele scanning was used to begin identification of regions associated with the less severe intestinal phenotype. Future identification of specific genes should further our understanding of the complex intestinal CF phenotype.

Results and discussion

CF mice on the mixed background have improved body weight gain

Body mass was recorded for male and female mice at 4 and 8 weeks of age. On the B6 background, female and male mice are about 30% smaller than wild type mice at both 4 and 8 weeks of age (Fig. 1A, B). By comparison, female CF mice on the mixed background were not significantly smaller than wild type mice at 4 weeks of age (Fig. 1A). The improved body weight of female CF mice on the mixed background was maintained at 8 weeks of age. Male CF mice on the mixed background at 4 weeks of age were significantly smaller than wild type and not significantly larger than CF mice congenic on the B6 background (Fig. 1B). By 8 weeks of age, CF males on the mixed background were 12% smaller but this was not significantly different compared to wild type mice (Fig. 1B).

Figure 1

Effect of genetic background on body weights of CF mice. (A) Female and (B) male mice were weighed at 4 and 8 weeks of age. Data are means ± SEM. (*) P < 0.001 vs other three groups by ANOVA with a post-hoc Tukey's test. There were no significant differences for any of the other comparisons. Data were obtained from: 65 wild type and 26 CF B6 females, 36 wild type and 8 CF mixed background females, 68 wild type and 30 CF B6 males, and 37 wild type and 6 CF mixed background males.

CF mice on the mixed background have reduced expression of inflammatory markers

Previous work showed that CF mice on the B6 background have an innate-type inflammation of the small intestine [21]. To determine whether the mixed genetic background affected expression of inflammatory marker genes, quantitative, real-time RT-PCR was used to measure gene expression. Expression of the following genes was compared in wild type and CF mice on the different genetic backgrounds. Mast cell protease 2 (Mcpt2) is a marker of differentiated mast cells [22] and mast cells are more abundant in the B6 CF mouse intestine. Leucine-rich α2 glycoprotein (Lrg1, [23]) is a marker of differentiating neutrophils, which are more numerous in the B6 CF mouse intestine. The same gene is also known as leucine-rich high endothelial cell glycoprotein (Lrhg) and has been shown to be a marker of high endothelial venules (HEV) [24] which increase in tissues during inflammation [25,26]. Hematopoietic cell transcript 1 (HemT1, [27]) is a marker of blood cell proliferation and its expression is strongly elevated in the B6 CF mouse small intestine. Serum amyloid A3 (SAA3, [28]) is an acute phase gene and its expression in villus epithelial cells is increased in the B6 CF intestine. Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3, [29]) is an anti-inflammatory gene that interacts with the JAK-STAT pathway and its expression in increased in the B6 CF intestine. Muclin (also known as dmbt1, [30]) expression is upregulated in the B6 CF intestine; it is a cell surface glycoprotein postulated to be an epithelial protective molecule [21,31].

Consistent with previous results, Mcpt2 was increased in CF mice on the B6 background by over 9-fold compared to wild type (Fig. 2A). By contrast, there was not a significant difference in Mcpt2 expression between CF and wild type on the mixed background (Fig. 2A). Lrg1/Lrhg expression was increased more than 20-fold in CF mice on the B6 background compared to wild type, but there was no significant difference between CF and wild type on the mixed background (Fig. 2B). SAA3 mRNA was about 3.5-fold increased in CF mice on the B6 background, but was not significantly different compared to wild type on the mixed background (Fig. 2C). SOCS3 was more than 2-fold increased in CF mice on the B6 background compared to wild type, and on the mixed background was only 1.5-fold greater than wild type, and the difference was not significant (Fig. 2D). Muclin is overexpressed almost 3-fold in the CF intestine on the B6 background, but on the mixed background the expression level in CF mice was not significantly different than wild type (Fig. 2E). Finally, HemT1 was overexpressed almost 20-fold in B6 CF mice compared to wild type, and on the mixed background the CF expression level was not statistically different from wild type (Fig. 2F).

Figure 2

Effect of genetic background on inflammatory gene expression in CF mouse small intestine. RNA expression levels were determined by quantitative real-time RT-PCR using gene-specific primers. Data are expressed relative to GAPDH mRNA, which does not vary between wild type and CF mice. Data are means ± SEM. (*) CF vs wild type on the B6 background, P < 0.005; (+) CF on the mixed background vs CF on the B6 background, P < 0.05 by ANOVA with a post-hoc Tukey's test. There were no significant differences for any of the 6 genes comparing: wild type B6 mice vs wild type mixed background; or CF mice on the mixed background vs wild type on either background. There were 8–11 samples analyzed per group for each gene.

Because of the gender differences in body weight, the gene expression data were analyzed by gender but there was no significant difference between females and males. With the limited number of animals, there was also no evidence for imprinting.

CF mice on the mixed background have less intestinal mucus accumulation

The most striking histological difference in the CF mouse small intestine is the accumulation of mucus in intestinal crypts which is associated with the lethal obstruction that results in death of these mice on a standard solid chow diet [32]. Using periodic acid Schiff's staining for neutral mucins, histological analysis of small intestine tissues was performed. The wild type small intestine on both the B6 and the mixed genetic backgrounds were similar. The intestinal crypts were very small with only traces of PAS-reactivity in the lumen (Fig. 3A and 3C, respectively). The surfaces of the villus epithelium were moderately stained and goblet cells were strongly stained in the wild type tissues. In contrast, the intestine of CF mice on the B6 genetic background exhibited greatly dilated crypts filled with PAS-reactive mucus (Fig. 3B). CF mice on the mixed background had less mucus accumulation than CF mice on the B6 background (Fig. 3D-F). The amount of mucus in CF mice on the mixed background was variable from mouse to mouse. In some mice (Fig. 3D), only occasional crypts had accumulated mucus and the crypt lumina were not very dilated. In some mice there was more mucus in the crypts (Fig. 3E), while others had moderate mucus accumulation (Fig. 3F). A total of six CF mice on the mixed background were examined histologically, and three had little mucus, one had some mucus, and two had moderate amounts of mucus. Despite the variability, all the CF mice on the mixed background had less crypt dilation and less mucus accumulation compared to CF mice on the B6 background.

Figure 3

Histological appearance of the small intestine of wild type and CF mice on the different genetic backgrounds. Tissue was paraffin embedded and stained with PAS for neutral mucins. The sections are from the middle portion of the small intestine (A) Wild type on the B6 background. (B) CF on the B6 background. (C) Wild type on the mixed background. (D-F) CF on the mixed background. (A, C) In the wild type tissue from both backgrounds, the crypts are small and have narrow lumina (arrows). (B) In the CF tissue on the B6 background, the crypt lumina are greatly dilated and filled with PAS-reactive mucus (arrows). In some CF mice on the mixed background, the crypts are not apparently different than wild type (D), and the crypts are normal appearing (arrows). Some CF mice on the mixed background had mildly affected crypts (E), while others had greater crypt dilation and mucus accumulation (F). Overall, the CF mice on the mixed background were less severely affected compared to those on the B6 background.

Thus, it appears that whatever the nature of the genetic differences between the two background strains, they affect secretion and accumulation of mucus in the CF small intestine. To determine if the difference could be accounted for by altered mucin gene expression, quantitative RT-PCR was used to measure mRNA expression of the intestinal goblet cell mucin gene, Muc2. In wild type intestine, B6 mice had 0.079 +/- 0.024 copies of Muc2/GAPDH (n = 8), and on the mixed background the level was 0.077 +/- 0.012 (n = 11). CF mice on the B6 background had 0.059 +/- 0.024 copies of Muc2 mRNA per GAPDH (n = 11), and on the mixed background the level was 0.056 +/- 0.010 (n = 11). Despite the increased mucus accumulation in CF, there is a slight decrease in Muc2 mRNA in the CF small intestine (P < 0.0001), as previously reported [33]. However, the milder CF phenotype on the mixed background, which includes less mucus accumulation, does not involve decreased mucin gene expression.

CF mice on the mixed background have improved survival

As reported by others [34], the expected number of Cftr null mice on the B6 background that survived to weaning was significantly less than that expected from Mendelian genetics (Tables 1 and 2). The degree of significance was greater for male mice (Tables 1 and 2). In contrast, on the mixed background, the distribution of genotypes of female offspring was not significantly different from the expected (Tables 1). For male mice on the mixed background, the P-value was less significant but still different compared to the B6 males (Table 2). These data indicate that the mixed background is associated with increased survival of CF mice.

Table 1

Distribution of Cftr genotypes in female offspring from breeding Cftr heterozygotes on the B6 and mixed backgrounds.

Statistical analysis was by Chi-square. (*) P-value if the sample size for the B6 mice is adjusted to be equal to that of the mixed background mice, assuming the same distribution of genotypes.

Table 2

Distribution of Cftr genotypes in male offspring from breeding Cftr heterozygotes on the B6 and mixed backgrounds.

Statistical analysis was by Chi-square. (*) P-value if the sample size for the B6 mice is adjusted to be equal to that of the mixed background mice, assuming the same distribution of genotypes.

The major cause of death in CF mice is intestinal obstruction, and intestinal obstruction is worsened when the mice are fed standard solid mouse chow [35]. Since the CF mice on the mixed background had better weight gain than on the B6 background and less mucus accumulation in the small intestine, their ability to survive on solid chow was tested. Mice were maintained on the liquid diet until 8 weeks of age, and then switched to solid chow for up to eight weeks. As shown in Fig. 4, wild type mice had 100% survival on chow, as expected. The majority of CF mice on the B6 background died within 2–3 weeks on solid chow, with about 60% mortality over the 8 week period. In contrast, only 22% of the CF mice on the mixed background died (Fig. 4).

Figure 4

Effect of genetic background on CF mouse survival on solid chow. Mice were maintained on the liquid diet (Peptamen) until 8 weeks of age, at which time they were fed standard solid mouse chow for up to 8 additional weeks. Deaths were recorded as they occurred and mice in obvious distress were sacrificed and 'death' recorded as the subsequent day. By log-rank test, CF mice on the mixed background had significantly earlier death compared to wild type (P = 0.035), and significantly later death than CF mice on the B6 background (P = 0.025). CF mice on the B6 background also died significantly earlier than wild type (P < 0.0005).

Identification of potential modifier loci

To determine the contributions of B6 and 129 alleles to the mixed genetic background, and to identify potential modifier regions, tail DNA was analyzed by PCR for markers of polymorphisms between these two mouse strains. Mice congenic on the B6 background, which were derived from mice originally on a B6/129 mixed background, were also analyzed to confirm they are congenic B6. Twelve CF mice on the B6 background averaged 99.5% B6 alleles. One of the twelve mice had alleles from both strains at chr.9, 40 cM. All twelve mice had both B6 and 129 markers on chromosome 6, 1 cM which is probably due to the targeted Cftr gene which is at chr.6, 3.1 cM [36].

Three CF mice on the mixed background were initially analyzed and were found to be 95% B6, 5% 129. A second group of 8 CF mice was analyzed and the markers used were refined to focus on the chromosomal regions showing variations from the B6 strain. The differences found from the two analyses are combined in Table 3. The differences in the mixed strain CF mice were at chr.1, 92 cM (9 of 11 mice had both B6 and 129 alleles); chr.9, 9 cM (all 11 mice had two 129 alleles); and chr.10, 65 cM (10 mice had both B6 and 129 alleles).

Table 3

Genome scanning analysis of CF mice on the mixed background.

The table shows the distribution of B6 and 129 alleles in mice from the two genetic backgrounds. An initial analysis was performed on 3 samples and a second analysis on 8 more samples. Only the markers that were not uniformly B6 alleles are shown. Some of the markers were refined based on the initial analysis, so not all markers were used for all 11 mice. (*) Eleven samples were analyzed but one sample was ambiguous.

Because the spacing of markers used was about 12 cM, genes within 75% of this interval on either side of the markers were looked at for potential relevance to the milder CF intestinal phenotype. None of the known chloride channels that might substitute for the missing CFTR are in the regions of the three chromosomes associated with the milder phenotype. There are several potassium channel genes in the identified regions that potentially could affect electrolyte and fluid transport: Kcnj9 (chr.1, 94.2 cM), Kcnj10 (chr.1, 93.5 cM), Kcnj5 (chr.9, 11 cM), and Kcnc2 (chr.10, 62 cM). All gene names are from the Mouse Genome Informatics website .

Inflammation is a hallmark of CF, and whether there is an inherent defect in CF that predisposes to excessive inflammation is controversial. Several genes involved in inflammation and the immune system are located in the regions of the markers identified: TNF superfamily members Tnfsf4, 6, and 8 (chr.1, 84.9–85 cM) which are involved in T cell activation [37,38]; three selectin genes (Sele, Sell, Selp, chr.1, 86.6 cM) which are involved in immune cell infiltration into inflamed tissues [39]; several members of immune cell surface proteins of the Slam family (slamf1, 2, 5, 6, and 9; chr.1, 89.5–93.3 cM) [40]; the chemokine gene Xcl1 (chr.1, 87 cM) which is expressed by mast cells and recruits lymphocytes [41]; several immunoglobulin Fc receptor genes (Fcrl3, Fcgr2b, and Fcgr3 at chr.1, 92.3 cM; Fcer1g at chr.1, 93.3 cM; Fcer1a at chr.1, 94.2 cM); the flagellin receptor Tlr5 (chr.1, 98 cM); Mmp3 (chr.9, 1 cM) which recruits CD4+ lymphocytes [42]; Mmp7 (chr.9, 1 cM) which activates Paneth cell-derived cryptdins (α-defensins) [43]; Icam1 (chr.9, 7 cM) which is involved in lymphocyte infiltration into inflamed tissues [44]; Kitl (chr.10, 57 cM) which is also known as stem cell factor, and is crucial for mast cell differentiation [45]; Im5 (chr.10, 65 cM) which is involved in antibody-responsiveness [46]; Lyzs (chr.10, 66 cM) which is a Paneth cell product that digests cell walls of bacteria [47]; Ifng (chr.10, 67 cM) which is an important inflammatory signal in CF as well as other conditions [48]; Il22 (chr.10, 67 cM), a member of the anti-inflammatory IL-10 interleukin family [49]; and the Stat2 and 6 genes (chr.10, 70 cM) which are important components of intracellular signaling pathways [50].

Also near the identified markers are a number of QTL associated with body weight: Cfbw1, CF mouse body weight at chr.1, 85 cM; Obq9, obesity 9 at chr.1, 88 cM; Bw8q1, body weight 8 at chr.1, 100 cM; Lbm6, lean body mass 6 at chr.9, 7.7 cM; Bwtq4, body weight 4 at chr.9, 8 cM; Bgeq8, body growth early 8 at chr.10, 57 cM; and Pbwg5, postnatal body weight growth 5 at chr.10, 68 cM.

Clearly, there are numerous genes in the three regions identified in this study. Because the CF mouse intestinal phenotype is characterized by an innate type immune response, with increases in mast cells and neutrophils, the genes that affect these cells are of special interest. The Kitl gene is crucial for differentiation of mast cells, and CF mice on the mixed background have much fewer mature mast cells than on the B6 background as revealed by less expression of Mcpt2. Similarly, for neutrophils the selectins and Icam1 are of interest, as these proteins are required for extravasation of neutrophils from the circulation into the inflamed tissue.

Altered immune responses may also relate to excessive mucus accumulation in the CF intestine. It is unclear why mucus accumulates to high levels in CF tissues. In part it may be due to reduced fluid secretion and a more acidic environment in the lumina of affected organs. However, there is also evidence for hypersecretion of mucus in CF [12], and it is likely that effector molecules released by mast cells and neutrophils (histamine, proteases, prostaglandins) have an important role in stimulating mucus secretion.

Conclusion

This work demonstrated that the CF inflammatory phenotype is much less severe in mice with a small contribution of 129/Sv alleles. A preliminary analysis identified regions on chr.1, 9, and 10 are that are potentially associated with the milder phenotype. Because of the inflammation of the CF small intestine, and the possible effects of immune cells on mucus secretion, the genes in the identified regions which are involved in mast cell and neutrophil differentiation and behavior are of special interest as potential CF modifiers. Future work should focus on narrowing down these regions and determining if there are polymorphisms that affect expression of specific genes that make the CF intestinal phenotype less severe.

Methods

Animals

Wild type and Cftr null mice on two different genetic backgrounds were used in this study. One group was congenic on the C57Bl/6 (B6) background, as previously described [21]. The other group was on a mixed background of about 95% B6 and 5% 129/Sv (129). The mice on the mixed background originated as part of a recently published study [20] as follows. Mice carrying a targeted mutation of the gastrin gene on a mixed B6/129 background [51] were bred for eight generations onto the B6 background. The gastrin(+/-) mice were then crossed for six generations with Cftr(+/-) mice congenic on the B6 background. A genome scan at this point showed that the mice were about 95% B6 and 5% 129 (see below). These mice were bred to obtain mice wild type for both gastrin alleles and either Cftr homozygous wild type [Cftr(+/+)] or Cftr homozygous null [Cftr(-/-)].

Mice were genotyped at 2 weeks of age by PCR as previously described [21]. Unless otherwise stated, mice were maintained on a complete elemental liquid diet (Peptamen; Nestle Deerfield, IL) to prevent intestinal obstruction that occurs in CF mice [52]. Wild type littermates were maintained on the same diet. In some experiments, 8 week old mice were transferred onto solid mouse chow instead of Peptamen, and survival was recorded. Mice with apparent distress were sacrificed and survival on chow was recorded as the following day. Male and female mice were used at 6–16 weeks of age. Mice were kept in a specific pathogen-free facility in barrier-top cages. All procedures were approved by the University of Kansas Medical Center IACUC.

Genetic background determination

The Genome Scanning Service of The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) was used to determine the contributions of C57Bl/6 and 129/Sv strains in the interbred mice. Pieces of mouse tail were sent to The Jackson Laboratory for simple sequence length polymorphism (SSLP) PCR analysis with the DMit primers specific for B6 and 129 strain alleles . The SSLP panel consists of 108 mapped markers designed to distinguish between B6 and 129 strains. The markers are spaced 12–13 cM apart and span the nineteen autosomes.

Measurement of gene expression

Total RNA was extracted from the entire small intestine as previously described [21]. Quantitative, real-time RT-PCR was used to measure expression of specific genes using the previously described primers [21]. Values were normalized to GAPDH mRNA and expression of this housekeeping gene is not altered in the CF mouse small intestine [21]. Expression of the major intestinal mucin, Muc2, was also measured using the forward (5'-GAC TTC GAT GGA CAC TGC TC-3') and reverse (5'-CAC GGT GTT TAT CTA CCA AC-3') primers.

Histology

The small intestine was flushed with phosphate buffered saline and immersion fixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde. The tissues were then prepared for paraffin embedding and sectioning by a commercial service (HSRL, Woodstock, VA). Sections (5 μm) were stained with periodic acid Schiff's (PAS) for neutral mucins.

Statistics

Gene expression and body weight data were compared by ANOVA with a post-hoc Tukey's analysis (Systat software, Chicago, IL). Survival data were analyzed by a log-rank test for P values (PEPI software, ). The distributions of genotypes of pups surviving to weaning from breeding Cftr(+/-) mice were compared to that expected by Mendelian genetics using Chi-square analysis. For all statistical tests, P < 0.05 was considered significant.

Authors' contributions

RCD oversaw the project, performed the histological analysis, performed statistical analyses, and contributed to writing the manuscript. ON performed the quantitative RT-PCR analysis, and contributed to writing the manuscript.

Acknowledgements

We thank Larysa Stroganova for maintenance of the mouse colonies and PCR genotyping. Supported by National Institutes of Health grant DK 56791.Haplotypes at the Tas2r locus on distal chromosome 6 vary with quinine taste sensitivity in inbred mice

Abstract

Background

The detection of bitter-tasting compounds by the gustatory system is thought to alert animals to the presence of potentially toxic food. Some, if not all, bitter stimuli activate specific taste receptors, the T2Rs, which are expressed in subsets of taste receptor cells on the tongue and palate. However, there is evidence for both receptor-dependent and -independent transduction mechanisms for a number of bitter stimuli, including quinine hydrochloride (QHCl) and denatonium benzoate (DB).

Results

We used brief-access behavioral taste testing of BXD/Ty recombinant inbred (RI) mouse strains to map the major quantitative trait locus (QTL) for taste sensitivity to QHCl. This QTL is restricted to a ~5 Mb interval on chromosome 6 that includes 24 genes encoding T2Rs (Tas2rs). Tas2rs at this locus display in total 307 coding region single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) between the two BXD/Ty RI parental strains, C57BL/6J (quinine-sensitive) and DBA/2J (quinine insensitive); approximately 50% of these mutations are silent. Individual RI lines contain exclusively either C57BL/6J or DBA/2J Tas2r alleles at this locus, and RI lines containing C57BL/6J Tas2r alleles are more sensitive to QHCl than are lines containing DBA/2J alleles. Thus, the entire Tas2r cluster comprises a large haplotype that correlates with quinine taster status.

Conclusion

These studies, the first using a taste-salient assay to map the major QTL for quinine taste, indicate that a T2R-dependent transduction cascade is responsible for the majority of strain variance in quinine taste sensitivity. Furthermore, the large number of polymorphisms within coding exons of the Tas2r cluster, coupled with evidence that inbred strains exhibit largely similar bitter taste phenotypes, suggest that T2R receptors are quite tolerant to variation.

Background

Animals use the gustatory system to provide information about food quality. For example, sweet-tasting foods may have a high caloric content and are preferred, while bitter-tasting foods often contain toxic substances, and are generally avoided. Two families of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) expressed in subpopulations of taste receptor cells (TRCs) of the gustatory epithelium have been implicated in the detection and transduction of sweet, bitter and umami (i.e., glutamate) taste: T1Rs for sweet-and umami-tasting stimuli [1-8], and T2Rs for bitter-tasting compounds [9-11].

The genes that encode T2Rs, the Tas2rs, were first identified by database mining of mammalian genomes near chromosomal markers previously linked to differences in bitter taste sensitivity [9,11-18]. In mice, the majority of Tas2rs lie within a single cluster on distal chromosome 6. Thirty-three human Tas2rs (including 8 pseudogenes) and thirty-six mouse Tas2rs (including 3 pseudogenes in C57BL/6J mice) have been identified [9,11,19], and several of these respond to particular bitter stimuli in heterologous expression assays [10,20-23], or represent a strong candidate gene for a specific bitter taste quantitative trait [18,24,25].

Several quantitative trait loci (QTL) have been identified that influence two-bottle intake of bitter stimuli in the mouse, including loci for quinine (Qui) [12,16,26], cyclohexamide (Cyx) [13] and sucrose octaacetate (Soa) [14,15,17] sensitivity. Each of these QTL map to mouse distal chromosome 6 and are linked to the marker D6Mit13, which lies within a cluster of 24 intact Tas2rs in the C57BL/6 genome (e.g., [16,27,28]). However, the interpretation of these studies remains problematic for two reasons. First, the density of chromosomal markers and number of recombinant inbred (RI) strains used in these earlier studies did not permit the physical definition of the intervals containing each QTL. Second, these previous attempts to map bitter taste QTLs relied on behavioral assays that measured consumption, and were thus susceptible to contributions of post-ingestive effects such as toxicity. As we have shown previously, such effects can confound the quantification of bitter taste behaviors [29]. Therefore, the relevance and/or contribution of the aforementioned QTLs to bitter taste remain unclear.

Furthermore, a number of physiological studies have suggested that the transduction of some amphiphilic bitter compounds, such as quinine and denatonium benzoate, may stimulate taste receptor cells independently of GPCRs (e.g. [30]). Quinine may directly activate G proteins, and both quinine and denatonium can block K+ channels [31-36] ; caffeine, another bitter-tasting substance, directly inhibits intracellular phosphodiesterase [33]. However, the relative contributions of T2R-dependent and T2R-independent mechanisms to the detection of these bitter stimuli are unknown.

Here we use a taste-salient brief-access lick test [29,37] to measure taste sensitivities in C57BL/6J (B6), DBA/2J (D2) and BXD/Ty (BXD) recombinant inbred (RI) mice to two bitter stimuli, quinine hydrochloride (QHCl) and denatonium benzoate (DB). Using 17 BXD lines that were genotyped at 762 informative chromosomal markers, we mapped a major QTL for QHCl taste to a ~5 Mb interval on distal chromosome 6 that contains all 24 of the Tas2r genes in the distal cluster. We analyzed the sequence of each Tas2r allele in the parental strains (B6 and D2) and 29 RI lines. This analysis revealed that all 24 genes are polymorphic between the two strains, and that these 24 Tas2rs comprise a single haplotype that correlates with QHCl taste sensitivity.

Results

Taste testing

Previous efforts to map QTL for bitter taste have utilized consumption tests that may be confounded by the contributions of post-ingestive effects [29]. We used a modified brief-access lick test, which minimizes the contribution of such effects [29,37] to determine whether B6 and D2 mice display differences in taste sensitivity to the taste stimuli QHCl and DB. After initially screening B6 and D2 mice to determine stimulus concentrations that were aversive but not saturating [47], we selected two ligand concentrations for each compound that best differentiated the two strains. Subsequent taste testing of BXD RI lines was restricted to these two concentrations (1 and 3 mM for both QHCl and DB). Avoidance by male and female B6 and D2 mice increased (as indicated by the decreased lick ratio) in a concentration-dependent manner for both compounds (Figure 1A; Table 1). There was a significant strain difference for both 1 and 3 mM QHCl (F[1,25] > 24.6; p < 0.0001). D2 mice displayed decreased aversion relative to B6 mice at both concentrations. On the other hand, the strains did not significantly differ in taste sensitivity to DB (Figure 1A). There were no significant effects of gender.

Table 1

Mean lick ratios for B6, D2 and BXD mice.

The number of individual mice tested for each strain (n) is listed in the second column. Subsequent columns show the mean lick rate to water during testing (± SEM), mean lick ratio for denatonium benzoate (DB), PROP (6-n-propylthiouracil; PR) and quinine hydrochloride (QH) at each of two concentrations (see Methods for details).

Figure 1

Lick ratios (mean ± SE) for B6, D2 and BXD strains. (A) Mean lick ratios for B6 (filled circles) and D2 (open circles) mice at two concentrations of QHCl and DB. In all panels, a lower mean lick ratio indicates a greater aversion, and therefore greater taste sensitivity, to the stimulus. For panels B, C, and D, each BXD strain is represented by a different color, and listed in order from least sensitive to most sensitive to 1 mM QHCL. (B) Mean lick ratios for the six BXD strains that are most sensitive to QHCl in this assay. (C) Mean lick ratios for the five BXD strains that are least sensitive to QHCl in this assay. (D) Mean lick ratios for the six BXD strains intermediate in QHCl taste sensitivity to those in (B) and (C). Cutoffs for the three QHCl taster groups were arbitrarily set, as there was a continuity of the phenotype at 1 mM QHCl: sensitive strains exhibited a lick ratio for 1 mM QHCl of ≤ 0.3, intermediate strains from 0.31-0.6, and insensitive strains > 0.6. The absence of two distinct phenotypic classes suggests that sensitivity to QHCL is under polygenic control.

We next tested mice from 17 BXD lines in the same manner. BXD mice also typically avoided both stimuli in a concentration dependent manner (Figures 1B–1D; Table 1). However, QHCl and DB taste sensitivity vary independently across these RI strains: some strains highly sensitive to QHCl are relatively insensitive to DB, and vice versa (Figures 1B–1D).

QTL mapping

Linkage analysis was conducted using Map Manager QTX (version 0.30[38]). No significant QTLs were identified for DB taste sensitivity, although several associations with markers on chromosomes 2,8 and 12 were "suggestive" (LRS > 9.4, genome-wide p = 0.65; see Additional File 1). A significant (LRS > 20.5; genome-wide p = 0.05) QTL for sensitivity to 1 mM QHCl was indicated on chromosome 6, with a second, suggestive (LRS > 11.4; genome-wide p = 0.65) QTL on chromosome 8 (Figure 2A); at 3 mM QHCl, both of these QTL were suggestive (LRS > 10.9) but did not reach genome-wide significance (Figure 2B).

Figure 2

A major QTL for QHCl taste on mouse chromosome 6. (Top panel) The interval map (see Methods) shows a significant QTL on chromosome 6 (green) and a suggestive QTL on chromosome 8 (yellow) affecting taste responses to 1 mM QHCl. (Bottom panel) For 3 mM QHCl, both QTL were suggestive (yellow). The dashed line indicates genome-wide significance.

The chromosome 6 QTL was linked to a single marker, D6Mit13 (Table 2, Figure 3). Adjacent proximal markers D6Mit254 and D6Mit194 are unlinked to the QHCl QTL, as is distal marker D6Mit374. Across the 17 RI lines tested there is at least one recombination event between D6Mit13 and either D6Mit254 (and D6Mit194, the physical position of which is not well defined) or D6Mit374. An additional proximal marker, D6Mit61, which lies between D6Mit194 and D6Mit13, was identified from genotypes of the BXD lines reported by the Jackson Laboratories. BXD/Ty-34 RI mice display a clear D2 phenotype for QHCl taste (Figure 1C) and D2 genotype for D6Mit13, but have a B6 genotype for D6Mit61 [39,40], indicating that D6Mit61 is unlinked to the QHCl QTL. Therefore, this QTL interval can be conservatively defined as that portion of mouse chromosome 6 that lies between D6Mit254 and D6Mit374, but is most likely restricted to the region between D6Mit61 and D6Mit374.

Physical mapping of the single linked marker, D6Mit13, and the two closest unlinked markers, D6Mit61and D6Mit374, was performed in silico based on the May, 2004 build of the public B6 genome. Based on these marker positions, the size of the QHCl chromosome 6 QTL is less than 5.0 Mb (Figure 3). This region contains a number of known genes, all but eleven of which encode members of two large receptor families: natural killer cell lectin-like receptors, and T2R-type taste receptors. The Tas2r genes (which encode the T2Rs) are found clustered within a 1.2 Mb interval on either side of D6Mit13 (Figure 3, Figure 4). Because of their proximity to the linked marker, their demonstrated expression in taste receptor cells, and their role in the detection of at least some bitter-tasting compounds, we hypothesized that one or more of the 24 Tas2rs at this locus were responsible for the major QHCl taste sensitivity QTL.

Figure 3

The QHCl QTL is linked to a single marker on chromosome 6. (A) As shown in the interval map for chromosome 6, the trait value (lick ratio for 1 mM QHCl) correlates strongly across BXD RI strains with the polymorphic marker D6Mit13 (bold). The dashed line indicates genome-wide significance. (B) The QHCl QTL (which lies between unlinked markers D6Mit61 and D6Mit 374) contains a cluster of putative bitter taste receptor genes, the Tas2rs (gray box). Physical positions of the polymorphic markers are given in Mb, and are based on the May, 2004 build of the B6 mouse genome. The physical position of D6Mit194 (*) is tentative.

Figure 4

A map of the distal chromosome 6 Tas2r cluster. Twenty-four intact Tas2r genes map to distal chromosome 6 (black). The Tas2rs are found in two subclusters on either side of the polymorphic marker D6Mit13 (red) and two genes encoding proline-rich salivary proteins (Prp2 and Prh1; red). Map positions, in Mb, represent chromosome 6 positions in the May, 2004 assembly of the B6 genome.

T2R alleles

If one (or more) Tas2rs underlie the chromosome 6 QHCl taste sensitivity QTL, we would predict that one (or more) Tas2r genes would exhibit one of three likely characteristics: (1) A Tas2r allele is a pseudogene, or is deleted, in D2 (QHCL-insensitive), but not B6 (QHCl-sensitive), mice; (2) Missense mutations in the single coding exon of a D2 Tas2r allele impact protein functions such as ligand binding or receptor coupling to downstream signaling cascades; (3) Mutations in noncoding or regulatory regions of a D2 Tas2r allele affects expression of the protein product. Though we considered all three of these to be valid possibilities, we initially focused on the likelihood that deletion or mutation within the coding sequence of a single D2 Tas2r would correlate with the QHCl taste insensitivity phenotype.

Twenty-four intact Tas2rs, along with three apparent Tas2r pseudogenes, have been identified in the distal chromosome 6 cluster of B6 mice [19] (Figure 4). We designed oligonucleotides to non-coding regions flanking the coding sequence of each intact Tas2r [see Additional file 2]. Using these oligos, we amplified each Tas2r coding sequence from D2 genomic DNA. PCR products were subcloned into cloning vectors and sequenced. Comparisons of the sequences of B6 and D2 orthologues revealed that only two of the twenty-four Tas2r alleles examined, Tas2r106 and Tas2r124, were identical across strains at the amino acid level (data not shown). A third, Tas2r120, could not be amplified from D2 genomic DNA (Figure 5) using either of two pairs of oligonucleotides (Additional file 2), suggesting that this Tas2r is deleted in D2 mice. Two D2 alleles, Tas2r103 and Tas2r117, contained numerous missense mutations and small deletions that create frame shifts and premature termination; these two genes may be pseudogenes in this strain. The remaining 19 Tas2rs contained between one and 16 missense mutations. All 24 Tas2rs examined have different alleles in B6 and D2 mice, and 307 single nucleotide polymorphisms are present within coding exons (data not shown). Although polymorphic residues between B6 and D2 Tas2rs are found in all regions of the receptors, 23% of the amino acid changes seen are within the first two extracellular loops of the T2Rs (data not shown).

Figure 5

Allelic variation across strains for four Tas2rs. B6 and D2 alleles of four Tas2rs can be differentiated based on diagnostic restriction digests of amplified PCR products (Tas2r105, Tas2r116 and Tas2r131) or on the presence or absence of a PCR product (Tas2r120). In each of the 17 BXD strains tested, Tas2r genotype was always correlated with QHCl taster phenotype (blue = B6 taster phenotype, red = D2 taster phenotype). See additional file 1: Table 3 for restriction enzymes and oligonucleotides.

The variability between orthologous receptors in these two inbred strains suggested that it might be possible to narrow the physical boundaries of the QHCl taste QTL by determining which Tas2r alleles are correlated with QHCl taste sensitivity. Therefore, we proceeded to screen genomic DNA from 29 available BXD RI lines, including the 17 that we had used in taste testing, for the Tas2r alleles they contained. In most cases, we were able to identify diagnostic restriction endonuclease digests that would allow us to quickly identify whether a particular Tas2r PCR product was amplified from a B6 or D2 allele. We did not analyze three genes (Tas2r104, Tas2r114 and Tas2r110) where no diagnostic restriction endonuclease could be identified. For Tas2r120, which is likely deleted in D2 mice, the absence of a PCR product was diagnostic of the D2 genotype for this gene.

Surprisingly, we discovered that there have been no apparent recombination events within the distal chromosome 6 cluster during the generation of the BXD RI lines. For all RI lines tested, every Tas2r within an individual RI line originated from the same parental strain (Figures 5, 6). Furthermore, the genotype of each Tas2r gene always correlated with the QHCl taste phenotype (Figures 6, 7), suggesting that the entire Tas2r cluster is a single haplotype that varies with QHCl taster status.

Figure 6

The Tas2r cluster is a single haplotype in BXD/Ty RI mice. The coding exon of each of 21 Tas2rs in the distal chromosome 6 cluster was amplified genomic DNA from 29 BXD/Ty RI strains. Each Tas2r within an individual BXD strain originated from the same parental strain (B6 allele = gray, D2 allele = white). The 17 BXD strains that were behaviorally tested in this study are indicated (*).

Figure 7

Tas2r genotype correlates with QHCl taste phenotype. Mean lick ratios of B6, D2 and BXD strains reported in Figure 1 are grouped based on Tas2r haplotype (B6 haplotype = blue, D2 haplotype = red). B6 mice (blue line on left panel) are more sensitive to 1 mM and 3 mM QHCl than are D2 mice (red line on left panel) in brief access taste tests. Similarly, BXD strains with the B6 Tas2r haplotype (blue lines, right panel) are more sensitive to QHCl than are BXD strains with the D2 Tas2r haplotype (red lines, right panel). The BXD strains are listed in order from least to most sensitive to 1 mM QHCL.

Discussion

The gustatory system of mammals is thought to detect thousands of chemically-diverse bitter-tasting substances [41]. Although specific receptors, enzymes and channels have been implicated in the transduction of bitter stimuli, how interactions of bitter stimuli with taste receptor cells lead to cellular activation and signaling to the central nervous system is still poorly understood. We have found that a single QTL on distal chromosome 6 accounts for most of the variation in QHCL taste sensitivity between B6 and D2 mice. This QTL maps to the same chromosomal position as a previously identified QTL for quinine intake, Qui [16,28], indicating that taste is the major factor in regulating quinine aversion. This is an important distinction, as the consumption of bitter-tasting stimuli can be dependent on factors independent of taste, such as toxicity [29].

Using 17 RI lines and 762 chromosomal markers, we have restricted the quinine taste QTL to a < 5 Mb region on distal chromosome 6 that contains 24 Tas2r genes. At least 60 other genes also lie within this interval, including two genes that encode proline-rich salivary proteins, Prp2 and Prh1; these proteins appear to play no direct role in bitter taste [48]. Tas2rs are the most likely candidates for the QHCl quantitative trait gene(s) due to: (1) their expression in taste receptor cells and (2) genetic and functional evidence linking them to the detection of a number of bitter taste stimuli. As of yet there is no evidence for quinine activation of T2Rs from functional assays of these receptors in heterologous cells or membrane preparations, likely due to the lipophilic nature of quinine [23]. However, several physiological studies have suggested that quinine can directly activate G proteins or cationic conductances, or can block K+ channels in taste receptor cells [34-36]. While our data indicates that quinine taste is largely T2R-dependent, it is not exclusively so. For example, the BXD RI lines exhibited a range of quinine sensitivity, with several strains having similar sensitivities to that of B6, some strains with sensitivities similar to that of D2, and a third group with a more intermediate phenotype (Figures 1, 7). This observation is consistent with a polygenic basis for quinine taste [16,26]. Also, a suggestive QTL on chromosome 8 does not contain any Tas2r genes, but does contain a number of genes encoding ion channels, enzymes and members of other receptor families (our unpublished data). It will be interesting to determine whether this suggestive QTL is linked to quinine taste and, if so, whether it is specific for this single bitter stimulus or more broadly related to all bitter taste.

Of the 29 BXD RI lines examined, there was no apparent recombination event within the chromosome 6 Tas2r cluster. While increasing the number of BXD RI lines or the number of markers used for genotyping them would facilitate the definition of smaller QTL intervals, in this case such an effort is unlikely to permit the identification of one or a few Tas2rs involved in quinine taste. For example, we examined six lines of AXB and BXA RIs with reported recombinations around D6Mit13; a small sampling of the Tas2rs in these RI lines again indicated no recombinations within the Tas2r cluster (data not shown). Behavioral genetic approaches have been invaluable for identifying genes involved in taste function, such as the Tas1r3 gene that encodes a receptor important for sweet and umami taste [42]. Positional cloning also permitted the identification of the Tas2r responsible for the majority of variance of phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) taste sensitivity in humans [18]. In both of these cases, however, the genes linked to saccharin or PTC taste were not tightly clustered with paralogues. For bitter taste, behavioral genetic approaches may be more useful for identifying genes encoding downstream signaling molecules or components of T2R-independent transduction mechanisms. For example, a QTL for PROP avoidance has been suggested on chromosome 7 [16], and we observe a suggestive QTL for quinine taste on chromosome 8 (Figure 2); in neither case are Tas2rs found at these loci (data not shown).

It is somewhat puzzling that 22 of the 24 Tas2rs examined encode variant proteins in B6 and D2 mice even though these strains exhibit similar taste responses to bitter compounds such as DB or cyclohexamide [47]. Taken together, these observations suggest that Tas2rs are quite tolerant of variation, and that perhaps most of the differences observed do not affect domains important for ligand interactions or receptor-mediated signaling mechanisms. Interestingly, 23% of missense mutations in D2 Tas2rs affect the first two extracellular loops of the receptors. These two loops have been recently shown to affect the ligand response profiles of some T2Rs [23]. More systematic analyses of structure-function relationships between these T2R variants and an array of bitter stimuli are necessary to determine which changes may impact ligand binding, interactions with other proteins, or overall receptor structure.

Such large numbers of nonsynonymous substitutions between orthologues is suggestive of adaptive selection. Analysis of sequence diversity of Tas2rs in humans, great apes and old world monkeys suggest that Tas2rs are subject to some degree of positive selection [43,44]. However, the fact that these two mouse strains, members of the same species, are so closely related makes this explanation problematic. It is possible that B6 and D2 mice, which have a similar origin in the early 20th century, inherited different Tas2r haplotypes present in wild mouse populations prior to inbreeding. Characterization of Tas2r sequences of several wild mouse species or subspecies, or in other inbred lines, would shed light on this issue.

Conclusion

In conclusion, we have found that sensitivity to the bitter-tasting substance quinine, as assayed by a taste specific brief-access test, is a polygenic trait in mice. However, the major mechanism for quinine taste transduction is likely dependent on one or more T2R receptors. Most Tas2r genes in the distal chromosome 6 cluster are polymorphic across inbred strains of mice, and this cluster forms a single haplotype that correlates with quinine taste sensitivity. The numerous differences in T2R protein sequence between these two mouse strains suggests that T2Rs are broadly tuned receptors quite tolerant to sequence variation. This tolerance may help to preserve the ability of T2R-expressing, bitter-sensitive taste cells to respond to a wide array of potentially toxic stimuli.

Methods

Mice and solutions

A total of 188 adult male and female mice were behaviorally tested in these experiments: 16 C57BL/6J (B6; 9 males, 7 females), 12 DBA/2J (6 females, 6 males), and 90 BXD/Ty recombinant inbred mice (average = 5 / line; 64 males, 26 females) from 17 unique lines (1, 2, 5, 6, 11, 13, 14, 15, 20, 21, 24, 27, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34). All mice were either obtained from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME), or were bred from mating pairs at UTHSC. At time of testing, mice were individually housed in standard shoebox cages with woodchip bedding and ad libitum food (Teklad 8640 rodent diet). Taste stimuli used in this experiment were made from reagent-grade chemicals: Sucrose, denatonium benzoate, 6-n-propylthiouracil and quinine hydrochloride (Sigma Aldrich Corp.; St. Louis, MO). Concentrations of each solution were made fresh daily using distilled water, and all taste stimuli were presented at room temperature. All animal protocols were approved by the UTHSC Institutional Animal care and Use Committee.

Brief-access tests

All behavioral tests were conducted in the commercially available Davis MS-160 gustometer (DiLog Instruments, Inc., Tallahassee FL). Testing procedures were similar to those described earlier [29,37]. Briefly, after 24 hours of water deprivation, naïve mice are given a single 20-minute trial consisting of access to a single bottle of distilled water (sipper tube training). On day 2, mice could initiate up to sixteen 5 s trials with a single lick to one of four bottles containing distilled water (trial training). Testing occurred in sessions 3 and 4, with one test session per day per mouse. Trials were 5 s in length with an inter-trial interval of 10 s, and mice had up to 120 s to initiate a trial; if a trial was not initiated during this interval, the shutter closed for 10 s and the next trial was presented. Mice were tested with 2 concentrations each of 4 different taste stimuli [1 and 3 mM QHCl, 1 and 3 mM DB, 3 and 10 mM PROP (unpublished data), and 0.01 and 0.1 M sucrose]. Stimulus trials were presented in 3 blocks of 8 trials, for a total of 24 possible trials per test session. Each block consisted of each concentration of stimulus plus four presentations of distilled water in random order. Individual mice were also tested in random order.

The dependent measure for each computed for each mouse was the lick ratio (average number of licks to stimulusx /average number of licks to water) where x is a given concentration of stimulus and the average number of licks to water is derived from the water trials during both test sessions. Lick ratio data for each stimulus were compiled for all individual mice, and means were prepared for each strain. B6 vs. D2 comparisons (Fig. 1A) were made using main effects ANOVA. Lick ratios for individual mice to sucrose were generally ~1.0 (data not shown), indicating that either concentration of this compound was licked at a similar rate to water by these thirsty animals. This stimulus was intended as a "neutral" stimulus, albeit one that has different sensory properties than water, and therefore not analyzed further. This was done to encourage sampling on "non-water" trials, as there is some evidence that mice detect distilled vs. adulterated water in brief-access taste tests based on olfactory clues; there is no evidence that mice can detect or distinguish among concentrations of a particular stimulus [37].

QTL mapping

Linkage analysis was conducted on BXD mice using freely available software (Map Manager QTX [38]), and BXD genotype data shared by Robert W. Williams, University of Tennessee Health Science Center [45]. Simple interval mapping was conducted. This method evaluates the association between trait values (lick ratios) and expected genotype of a hypothetical quantitative trait locus (QTL) at multiple analysis points between each pair of adjacent marker loci. The significance of each potential association is measured by the likelihood ratio statistic (LRS; e.g. [46]). Permutation analysis (x2000) was used to determine genome-wide significance criteria for LRS scores. Significance was set at p < 0.05 and suggestive refers to p < 0.63. Additional markers used to refine the QTL on chromosome 6 were identified from the Jackson Laboratories online resources for the BXD RI strains [40].

Identification of T2R alleles

Oligonucleotides were based on published mTas2r B6 or 129/SvJ cDNA sequences or on the public B6 genome. Entire coding regions plus ~50 kb of flanking sequence of each single-exon Tas2r was amplified from D2 or BXD RI genomic DNA (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using a high-fidelity polymerase TaqPro Complete (Denville Scientific, South Plainfield, NJ). PCR products were subcloned into pGemT-Easy (Promega, Madison, WI) and sequenced at the University of Maryland School of Medicine Biopolymer Core. The sequences of D2 products were compared to B6 sequences available in Genbank (see Additional file 2), and polymorphisms identified. When possible, unique restriction sites were identified that differentiated B6 and D2 alleles, and the corresponding restriction endonucleases were used in diagnostic digests of Tas2r cDNAs amplified from genomic DNA of each BXD/Ty RI strain. For Tas2r120, the absence of a PCR product was considered diagnostic of the D2 allele.

Authors' Contributions

TN conducted the in silico analysis of the quinine taste QTL, analyzed the Tas2r genes, participated in the design of the study and drafted the manuscript. JB conducted the behavioral studies and QTL analysis. SM assisted with the in silico analysis of the quinine taste QTL and the Tas2rs, and with the QTL analysis. JB and SM conceived of the study, participated in its design, and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Comments and requests should be addressed to JB or SM.

Table 2

Linkage of a QHCl QTL to D6Mit13 on chromosome 6.

Markers are listed from proximal (D6Mit150) to distal (SO8Gnf046.785), with physical position indicated in Mb. The physical position of D6Mit194 (italics) should be considered tentative. The LRS (likelihood ratio statistic) is listed for each locus, signifying the level of association of the trait (QHCl taste sensitivity) with each locus. Variance (Var) refers to the amount of the total trait variance explained by a QTL at this locus, as a percentage. Additive regression coefficients (Add) are listed for each association; in each case the coefficient is positive, indicating that D2 alleles increase the trait value (i.e. higher lick ratios). In simple marker regression analysis, all of these loci are associated with QHCl sensitivity at p < 0.001; only the association of sensitivity to 1 mM QHCl with D6Mit13 reaches genome-wide significance (asterisk).

Supplementary Material

Additional File 2

Table 4: Molecular biological methods for the analysis of Tas2rs.

Click here for file

Additional File 1

Table 3: Marker regression results for DB taste sensitivity.

Click here for file

Acknowledgements

The authors thank Sandeep Raghow and Aldan Shank for technical assistance with the behavioral studies and Robert Lane for useful discussions. This study was supported by grants from the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (DC05786 to SM, DC04935 to JB), a Program Enrichment Fellowship from the University of Maryland, Baltimore (TN) and by the University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center (JB).A screen for proteins that interact with PAX6: C-terminal mutations disrupt interaction with HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11

Abstract

Background

The PAX6 protein is a transcriptional regulator with a key role in ocular and neurological development. Individuals with heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the PAX6 gene have malformations of the eye and brain. Little is known about the interactions of PAX6 with other proteins, so we carried out a systematic screen for proteins that interact with PAX6.

Results

We used bioinformatics techniques to characterise a highly conserved peptide at the C-terminus of the PAX6 protein. Yeast two-hybrid library screens were then carried out to identify brain-expressed proteins that interact with the C-terminal peptide and with the entire PAX6 proline-serine-threonine-rich domain. Three novel PAX6-interacting proteins were identified: the post-synaptic density (PSD) protein HOMER3, the dynein subunit DNCL1, and the tripartite motif protein TRIM11. Three C-terminal PAX6 mutations, previously identified in patients with eye malformations, all reduced or abolished the interactions.

Conclusion

Our preliminary data suggest that PAX6 interacts with HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11. We propose that the interaction of PAX6 with HOMER3 and DNCL1 is a mechanism by which synaptic activation could lead to changes in neuronal transcriptional activity, and that some of the neural anomalies in patients with PAX6 mutations could be explained by impaired protein-protein interactions.

Background

The PAX6 protein is a member of the PAX (paired-box) family of transcriptional regulators and is essential for normal ocular and neural development [1]. Heterozygous mutations of the human PAX6 gene cause aniridia (absence of the iris) and a range of other congenital eye malformations [2]. Neural defects such as foveal hypoplasia and optic nerve hypoplasia are common in PAX6-associated eye disease [3-5]. Homozygous mutations in man and mouse are lethal and result in severe developmental abnormalities including anophthalmia, severe reduction of the olfactory structures and gross brain malformations [2,6]. The roles of PAX6 in brain development have mainly been studied in homozygous mutant mice or rats and include arealisation of the cerebral cortex [7], formation of the prosencephalon-mesencephalon boundary [8], axon guidance [8], differentiation of neurons from glia [9] and neuronal migration in the cerebellum [10].

The discovery of multiple and diverse roles for PAX6 in brain development prompted MRI analyses of aniridia patients, and a range of distinctive brain anomalies were uncovered. The most common and striking of these was absence or hypoplasia of the anterior commissure [11]. Other defects included absence or hypoplasia of the pineal gland, cortical polymicrogyria, white matter changes in the corpus callosum and grey matter changes in the cerebellum [11-13]. Functional changes included hyposmia and abnormal inter-hemispheric auditory transfer [11,14].

The defining feature of all PAX proteins is the presence of a 128 amino acid DNA-binding paired domain that has been highly conserved over evolution [1]. In addition to the paired domain, PAX6 also contains a DNA-binding homeodomain and a proline, serine and threonine-rich (PST) domain at the C-terminus [1,6]. The PST domain, which encompasses the C-terminal 145 amino acids of PAX6, has been shown to act as a transcriptional activator [6]. The PAX6 protein directly regulates a wide range of target genes [1,2] including Pax2 [15], Ngn2 [16] and glucagon [17].

The Pax6 gene has a spatially and temporally complex expression pattern in the eye, brain, nasal structures, spinal cord and pancreas [1]. Although PAX6 is clearly involved in multiple developmental processes, common themes are now emerging concerning the role of PAX6 in neural tissues. Gradients of Pax6 expression are important for determining positional characteristics in the retina [18] and the neocortex [7]. PAX6 plays a role in development of specific axonal connections between the retina and the brain [18] and within the forebrain [8,19]. It is also involved in the differentiation of neural cell types from multipotent precursors in the retina [16] and the cerebral cortex [9] through activation of bHLH genes such as Ngn2 and Mash1. These studies provide a clear link between PAX6 function in the retina and the brain, and are of particular relevance to the neurological phenotypes of individuals with PAX6 mutations.

It is becoming apparent that transcription factors do not act in isolation but are dependent on interactions with other proteins to carry out their function [20,21]. These interactions introduce more specificity into the regulatory function of a given transcription factor. To date only three PAX6 protein-protein interactions have been described: with SOX2 on the lens-specific enhancer element of the δ-crystallin gene [22]; with MDIA, which modulates PAX6 activity in early neuronal development [23], and with MAF proteins on the glucagon promoter, which causes increased expression of this pancreatic hormone gene [17].

Here we report the preliminary results of the first systematic screen for proteins that interact with PAX6. We used sequence alignment algorithms and secondary structure prediction programs to define a new domain of 32 amino acids at the C-terminal end of the PAX6 protein. We then screened a brain library with this peptide using the yeast two-hybrid technique and identified three novel interacting proteins, HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11. The interaction between PAX6 and these proteins was disrupted by naturally occurring C-terminal PAX6 mutations.

Results

A highly conserved C-terminal PAX6 peptide

We and others [31-33] noted that there is significant sequence conservation at the C-terminal end of the PAX6 protein. BLAST analysis of the amino acid sequence of the PAX6 PST domain (aa 278–422) revealed a highly conserved motif within the last 28 amino acids (beginning at the 'GLISP' motif, Figure 1a). Strong conservation was seen in distantly related species such as axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum) and sea urchin (Paracentrotus lividus) (Figure 1a).

Figure 1

Characterisation of the PAX6 C-terminal peptide. (a) CLUSTAL alignment of the terminal 42 amino acids of PAX6 from diverse species. (*) indicates invariant residues, (:) indicates highly similar substitutions and (.) indicates moderately similar substitutions. (b) Secondary structure analysis of the highly conserved terminal 28 amino acids predicts a single beta sheet (arrow) in the SVPVQ peptide. (c) When 4 residues are added in the N-terminal direction, 2 beta sheets are now predicted.

We subjected the whole PAX6 PST domain to secondary structure analysis using JPRED, a program that uses a number of different protein structure prediction algorithms to generate a consensus secondary structure (Figure 1) [25,26]. The PST domain was largely devoid of predicted secondary structure except for the C-terminal region, which contained two predicted beta sheets within the highly conserved domain, one in the 'GLISP' motif and one in the 'SPVPQ' motif (identical to the pattern shown in Figure 1c). Initially we defined the C-terminal domain as running from the 'GLISP' motif up to the stop codon, since this region was most highly conserved and contained strongly predicted secondary structure elements. However when we performed secondary structure prediction analysis on this 28 amino acid peptide, the first beta sheet was lost (Figure 1b). Addition of another 4 amino acids (TTST) immediately before 'GLISP' caused recovery of the first beta sheet (Figure 1c). Although these 4 residues are not highly conserved (Figure 1a), they appear to be important for seeding the first beta sheet and therefore for secondary structure. Thus we define the C-terminal peptide as being the final 32 amino acids of PAX6, running from threonine 391 to the stop codon (top line of Figure 1c).

Yeast two-hybrid screening

We hypothesised that the C-terminal peptide might be involved in protein-protein interactions, and we tested this by screening a cDNA library using the yeast two-hybrid system with a construct (PAX6CTP) in which the 32 amino acid C-terminal peptide was fused to the yeast GAL4 DNA binding domain. We chose to screen a mouse brain cDNA library as no human libraries were available. Given the fact that the amino acid sequence of the PAX6 protein is identical in man and mouse, we reasoned that a mouse brain library would yield relevant interactors. For comparison we also carried out the screen using a construct containing the whole PST domain (PAX6PST).

The C-terminal peptide screen gave 15 colonies that were positive with all three reporters and the PST domain screen gave 62 colonies. The interacting plasmids were isolated and the cDNA inserts sequenced. Three cDNAs were identified 3 or more times, Homer3 (NM_011984), Dncl1 (Dynein cytoplasmic light chain 1, NM_019682, also known as Pin or Dlc8) and Trim11 (Tripartite motif protein family member 11, NM_053168). Homer3 (6 clones) and Dncl1 (2 clones) were identified in the C-terminal peptide screen. Homer3 (7 clones), Dncl1 (2 clones) and Trim11 (6 clones) were identified in the PST domain screen. All cDNA inserts were in-frame with the coding region of the pPC86 GAL4 activation domain. None of the cDNAs was present in a list of known false positives [34].

HOMER3 is a member of the HOMER family of neuronal post-synaptic density (PSD) proteins [35]. DNCL1 is a subunit of two motor protein complexes, dynein and myosin-Va, both of which are involved in intracellular trafficking of proteins and organelles in neurons [36,37]. TRIM11 is a member of the tripartite motif protein family and contains a RING finger, a B-box zinc finger, a coiled coil domain and a B30.2 domain [38]. The possible significance of the interactions between these proteins and PAX6 is discussed below.

Semi-quantitative PCR

To check that the Homer3, Dncl1 and Trim11 clones were not identified multiple times solely because they are highly abundant in the library, we performed a semi-quantitative PCR assay. We compared the relative abundance of Homer3, Dncl1, Trim11 and Pax6 with Gapdh and Atp5a1. Gapdh and Atp5a1 both show strong constitutive expression in a variety of tissues including the brain [29,30]. Homer3, Dncl1, Trim11 and Pax6 were only amplified strongly after 35 cycles of PCR (Figure 2) and were therefore present at relatively low levels compared to Gapdh (amplified strongly after 25 cycles) and Atp5a1 (amplified strongly after 30 cycles; Figure 2).

Figure 2

Semi-quantitative PCR analysis of Homer3, Dncl1, Trim11 and Pax6 in the mouse brain cDNA library. Library cDNA was amplified with primers specific for Pax6 (600 bp), Homer3 (485 bp band), Dncl1 (485 bp) and Trim11 (609 bp) for 20, 25, 30 or 35 cycles. Atp5a1 (415 bp) and Gapdh (450 bp), which are highly expressed in the brain, are included for comparison. M indicates the Φ×174 HaeIII DNA size marker; the positions of the 603 bp and 310 bp marker bands are indicated.

We concluded that Homer3, Dncl1 and Trim11 clones were not highly abundant in the library. This is consistent with the idea that they were pulled out because the encoded proteins interact specifically with the C-terminal peptide or PST domain of PAX6.

Yeast two-hybrid pairwise interactions

By library screening we identified two proteins (HOMER3 and DNCL1) that interact with the C-terminal peptide and three proteins (HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11) that interact with the whole PST domain. This suggests that HOMER3 and DNCL1 interact specifically with the C-terminal peptide while TRIM11 interacts with a more N-terminal part of the PST domain. We conducted pairwise tests between specific constructs to confirm the interactions identified in the library screen and to further investigate the interaction between PAX6 and HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11. The Dncl1 and Trim11 clones that were pulled out of the library were full-length, but the Homer3 cDNAs lacked the N-terminal 70 amino acids. The missing coding region was inserted into the truncated Homer3 cDNA to give a full-length expression construct (see Methods). Pairwise interactions were carried out with both the full-length and truncated Homer3 clones.

We confirmed that the whole PAX6 PST domain interacts with HOMER3 (full-length and truncated constructs), TRIM11 and DNCL1, as all three reporter genes were strongly activated in pairwise tests (Figure 3; Table 1). In contrast the interaction between the C-terminal peptide and HOMER3 or DNCL1 could not be confirmed with pairwise tests (Table 1). Occasionally, partial suppression of growth on plates containing 5-fluoro-orotic acid was observed, indicating low-level activation of the URA3 reporter; however HIS3 and LacZ activation were not observed. The reasons for this are not clear, although it may be that the pairwise tests were of sub-optimal sensitivity compared to the library screen. However we were able to confirm that the C-terminal peptide is important for the interaction with HOMER3 and DNCL1 because interaction with the PAX6PST-CT construct, which lacks the final 32 amino acids, was completely abolished (Figure 3, Table 1). TRIM11 interacted equally well with PAX6PST and PAX6PST-CT (Figure 3, Table 1). This is consistent with the library screens in which TRIM11 was isolated with the PST domain but not with the C-terminal peptide and supports the idea that the C-terminal peptide is not important for the interaction between PAX6 and TRIM11.

Figure 3

LacZ reporter gene activation in pairwise tests. pPC86 constructs are shown across the top, and pDBLeu constructs are shown down the right hand side. PAX6PST, PAX6 PST domain; PAX6PST/Q422R, PAX6 PST domain with the Q422R mutation; PAX6PST/X423L, PAX6 PST domain with the X423L mutation, PAX6PST/1615del10, PAX6 PST domain with the 1615 del10 mutation; PAX6PST-CT, PAX6 PST domain minus the C-terminal peptide. 'Truncated HOMER3' is HOMER3 lacking the N-terminal 70 amino acids. Five control strains are shown for comparison (left). These range from non-interactor (A) to strong interactor (E).

Table 1

Pairwise interaction tests between normal and mutant PAX6 constructs and HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11. +++: strong interaction; ++: moderate interaction; +: weak interaction; (+) borderline interaction with one or two reporters activated at very low levels; 0: no interaction. PAX6PST, PAX6 PST domain; PAX6CTP, PAX6 C-terminal peptide; PAX6PST-CT, PAX6 PST domain minus the C-terminal peptide; PAX6PST/Q422R, PAX6 PST domain with the Q422R mutation; PAX6PST/X423L, PAX6 PST domain with the X423L mutation, PAX6PST/1615del, PAX6 PST domain with the 1615 del10 mutation. HOMER3-FL, HOMER3 full-length clone; HOMER3-Tr, truncated HOMER3 clone lacking the N-terminal 70 amino acids.

Having confirmed that HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11 interact with the PAX6 PST domain, we next investigated how the interactions were affected by three C-terminal PAX6 mutations that have been previously described in patients with ocular anomalies. The first mutation is a single nucleotide substitution 1627A>G that causes a glutamine to arginine amino acid substitution in the last codon of PAX6. This missense mutation (Q422R) has been reported in two patients, one affected by anterior segment dysgenesis with uveal ectropion and one with typical aniridia and foveal hypoplasia [27,33].

The second mutation (1615del10) was found in an aniridia family [28]. This frame-shifting deletion occurs just before the PAX6 stop codon and is predicted to cause translational read-through into the 3' untranslated region, generating a protein in which the last 5 amino acids of the C-terminal peptide are replaced by a 103 amino acid-extension. Affected individuals in this family showed unusual neurobehavioural traits including impaired social cognition and poor verbal inhibition [28]. MRI analysis revealed grey matter abnormalities in the frontal lobe, temporal lobe and cerebellum, and white matter deficits in the corpus callosum [13].

The third mutation 1629insT (X423L) has been reported in several aniridia patients [11,12,27,33]. Insertion of a single T nucleotide at position 1629 changes the stop codon (TAA) to a leucine codon (TTA) and generates a full length PAX6 protein with a C-terminal extension that extends for a further 35 amino acids into the 3' untranslated region. MRI analysis of six patients with this mutation revealed variable brain defects including absence or hypoplasia of the anterior commissure, pineal gland and olfactory bulbs [12]. Two patients had temporal polymicrogyria, one in association with epilepsy [12].

The three mutations were introduced into the PAX6PST construct, and pairwise tests were carried out to investigate the interaction of each mutant protein with HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11. All three mutations had a clear effect on the interactions. The most subtle mutation (Q422R) caused a reduction in the interaction with HOMER3 and DNCL1 (Figure 3, Table 1). The C-terminal extension mutations X423L and1615del10 mutations both dramatically reduced or abolished the interaction with HOMER3 and DNCL1 (Figure 3, Table 1).

None of the three mutations affected the interaction with TRIM11 which again is consistent with the hypothesis that TRIM11 interacts with a more N-terminal part of the PST domain.

Discussion

On the basis of secondary structure predictions and amino acid sequence conservation, we defined a novel PAX6 protein domain, which we have called the C-terminal peptide. We performed yeast two-hybrid library screens with the C-terminal peptide and the whole PST domain and we identified three novel interacting proteins, HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11. In library screens, HOMER3 and DNCL1 interacted with the C-terminal peptide and the PST domain while TRIM11 interacted only with the PST domain, suggesting that HOMER3 and DNCL1 specifically interact with the C-terminal peptide while TRIM11 interacts with a more N-terminal part of the PST domain. The interactions between the PST domain and HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11 were confirmed in pairwise tests. We were not able to confirm the interaction between HOMER3 or DNCL1 with the C-terminal peptide construct in pairwise tests, but we showed that the C-terminal peptide was important for PAX6/HOMER3 or PAX6/DNCL1 interaction because HOMER3 and DNCL1 did not interact with a PST domain construct lacking the C-terminal peptide.

HOMER3 is found in the PSD of neurons and directly binds to type I metabotropic glutamate receptors, which act via phospholipase C to stimulate IP3-mediated release of Ca2+ from intracellular vesicles [35,39]. HOMER3 is a member of the HOMER family of proteins that are constitutively expressed in the brain and play a role in post-synaptic signalling and receptor trafficking by forming multivalent links with various receptors and PSD scaffolding proteins [35,39-41]. HOMER proteins have also been implicated in axon guidance during brain development [42].

DNCL1 is a subunit of two intracellular transport protein complexes, dynein and myosin Va [36]. Dynein and myosin Va are involved in the microtubule-based and actin-based movement respectively of proteins, organelles and vesicles in neurons [36,37]. Myosin Va is enriched in the PSD [43], and DNCL1 binds to a variety of PSD proteins including guanylate kinase domain-associated protein [44] and neuronal nitric oxide synthase [45].

TRIM11 is a member of the mouse tripartite motif protein family (also known as the RBCC family), and contains the three characteristic structural motifs of this protein family, a RING finger, a B-box zinc finger, and a coiled coil domain, as well as a B30.2 domain that is found in many but not all TRIM proteins [38]. TRIM11 interacts with Humanin, a protein that suppresses the neurotoxicity associated with Alzheimer's disease [46]. TRIM11 lowers Humanin levels by a mechanism that appears to involve ubiqutin-mediated proteasomal degradation [46].

At present our data must be considered preliminary because the interactions have not been confirmed by any other approach. However it is interesting to speculate that the interaction of PAX6 with HOMER3 and DNCL1 may be the basis of a mechanism by which synaptic signalling causes changes in gene expression. We propose that PAX6 is sequestered in the PSD by binding to HOMER3. Since receptor activation causes dissociation of HOMER proteins [35], PAX6 may be released as a result of synaptic activity, allowing it to interact with DNCL1. The PAX6/DNCL1 complex could then participate in myosin Va-mediated transport along the PSD-associated actin cytoskeleton followed by dynein-mediated transport along the microtubule network, eventually reaching the nucleus [36]. Since TRIM11 is implicated in protein degradation [46], it may play a role in PAX6 protein turnover.

Precedents for association of transcription factors with the post-synaptic density include STAT3 and CREB, which act as messengers between the synapse and the nucleus [47,48]. Although the full-length PAX6 protein is predominantly nuclear, there is good evidence in mouse, quail and nematode for an isoform that lacks the paired domain, is both nuclear and cytoplasmic, and binds DNA through the homeodomain alone [49-51]. In mice the paired-less isoform is relatively abundant in brain [49]; however its subcellular localisation in neurones, and the possibility of an association with the PSD, remains to be investigated.

Regarding the subcellular localisation of the putative interacting proteins, HOMER3 is predominantly found at the interface between the PSD and the cytoplasm [39], DNCL1 is chiefly cytoplasmic, although nuclear localisation has been reported [51], and TRIM11 is both nuclear and cytoplasmic [38]. Therefore cytoplasmic PAX6 could potentially interact with all three proteins, while nuclear PAX6 could interact with TRIM11 and DNCL1. At the tissue level, HOMER3 expression has been detected in thymus and lung but it has mainly been studied in brain where it is found in the forebrain, hippocampus and cerebellum [39]. DNCL1 and TRIM11 both have wide expression domains that include the brain [44,38]. Thus the expression of all three interactors overlaps with PAX6 at the tissue level [2,7,8,10]. We detected co-expression of PAX6, HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11 by RT-PCR in human adult brain RNA (IH, L Harrison and A Brown, data not shown).

We demonstrated that the interaction between the PST domain and HOMER3 or DNCL1 was impaired by three naturally occurring mutations that are located in the PAX6 C-terminal peptide. The Q422R mutation, which involves a glutamine to arginine substitution at the last amino acid position of PAX6, caused a reduction in the interaction with HOMER3 and DNCL1. The X423L and 1615del10 mutations severely reduced or completely abolished the interaction with HOMER3 and DNCL1. The predicted effect of the X423L and 1615del10 mutations is to cause translation into the 3' untranslated region, thus generating proteins with abnormal extensions that might be expected to disrupt the conformation of the C-terminal end of the protein. The 1615del10 mutation also removes the last 5 amino acids of the C-terminal peptide [28].

None of the mutations affected the interaction with TRIM11, suggesting that they do not alter the conformation of the more N-terminal part of the PST domain. All our data are consistent with the hypothesis that TRIM11 does not interact with the C-terminal peptide, but interacts with the PST domain between the homeodomain and the C-terminal peptide.

Most aniridia patients are heterozygous for mutations that introduce a premature termination codon into the PAX6 open reading frame [2,52]. These alleles would be expected to encode truncated proteins or no protein at all if the mutant RNA is degraded by nonsense-mediated decay [52]. We propose that the brain anomalies that have been observed in aniridia patients may be partly explained by impaired interaction between PAX6 and HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11. The neurobehavioural phenotype associated with 1615del10 and the polymicrogyria associated with X423L may result from a specific effect of these unusual C-terminal extension mutations. There is evidence that signalling and transport mechanisms that were initially characterized in the brain may also be conserved in the retina, suggesting that impaired PAX6 protein-protein interactions may also have implications for the retinal defects observed in individuals with PAX6 mutations [53,54].

Conclusion

We have presented preliminary evidence that the neurodevelopmental transcriptional regulator PAX6 interacts with HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11. We suggest that the interaction of PAX6 with HOMER3 and DNCL1 is a mechanism by which synaptic signalling could lead to regulated changes in gene expression in neurons. We also propose that some of the neural anomalies in patients with PAX6 mutations may be explained by impaired protein-protein interactions.

Methods

Bioinformatics techniques

Sequence database searches were carried out using the BLAST program available through the Bioinformatics Applications at the Rosalind Franklin Centre for Genomics Research [24]. Protein sequences that were highly homologous to the C-terminus of human PAX6 were aligned using CLUSTAL [24]. Secondary structure prediction was performed using the JPRED consensus method [25,26].

Yeast two-hybrid constructs

All cDNA and amino acid numbering is based on the human PAX6 cDNA and protein reference sequences available from the Human PAX6 Allelic Variant Database web site [27]. Standard PCR and subcloning techniques were used to make three PAX6 cDNA constructs in the pDBLeu expression vector (ProQuest Two-Hybrid System, Invitrogen), which generates a protein fused to the yeast GAL4 DNA binding domain. PAX6PST contains the whole PST domain (amino acids 278–422 of the full-length PAX6 protein). Primers were ST001 (forward) 5'-AAA AGT TCG ACT GCC AGC AAC ACA CCT AGT C-3' and ST005 (R) 5'-TTT TGC GGC TTT TTA CTG TAA TCT TGG CCA GTA TTG-3'. PAX6CTP contains the newly defined C-terminal peptide alone (391–422). Primers were ST004 (F) 5'-AAA AGT CGA CTA CCA CTT CAA CAG GAC TCA TT-3' and ST005 (R). PAX6PST-CT contains the PST domain minus the C-terminal peptide (278–390). This was made by cutting PAX6PST with NdeI and NotI to drop out the C-terminal peptide, and inserting a synthetic linker between the two restriction sites. All fragments generated by PCR or with linkers were sequenced to check that no errors had been introduced.

A PAX6 PST domain construct containing the mutation 1627A>G (Q422R) was generated in the same way as the PAX6PST construct, but using the reverse PCR primer ST006 5'-TTT TGC GGC CGC TTT TTA CCG TAA TCT TGG CCA GTA TTG AG-3', which contains the mutant nucleotide substitution (underlined).

cDNA sequences containing the mutations 1615del10 [28] and 1629insT (X423L) [12] were generated by PCR from reverse transcribed RNA (a gift from Dr K Williamson and Prof V van Heyningen). Primers were ST015 (F) 5'-CCC ACA TAT GCA GAC ACA C-3' and ST031 (R) 5'-TTG CGG CCG CAT CCA TCC AGT CTA CAT TGT TC-3'. The PAX6PST construct was cut with NdeI and NotI to release the normal C-terminal peptide, and the mutant sequence was inserted.

Yeast two-hybrid library screens

A mouse brain cDNA library (ProQuest, Invitrogen) was screened with the PAX6PST and PAX6CTP pDBLeu constructs. The library was constructed in the pPC86 vector, which produces proteins fused to the yeast GAL4 activation domain. The system uses three GAL4-activated reporter genes, HIS3, URA3 and lacZ, to identify positive interactions. Reporters are activated when the bait protein fused to the GAL4 DNA binding domain (pDBLeu) interacts with the prey protein fused to the GAL4 activation domain (pPC86), thus reconstituting GAL4 function. HIS3 activation allows growth on plates lacking histidine. Weak URA3 activation suppresses growth on plates containing 5-fluro-orotic acid while strong URA3 activation permits growth on plates lacking uracil. LacZ activation causes X-gal to turn blue in a beta-galactosidase assay. All assays were carried out in parallel with the five ProQuest control yeast strains A-E, which range from non-interactor (A) to strong interactor (E).

All procedures were carried out according to the supplier's protocols. Briefly, chemically competent MaV203 yeast cells were co-transformed with the cDNA library and the bait plasmid pDBLeu PAX6CTP or pDBLeu PAX6PST. Transformants (5 × 107) were plated on medium lacking histidine to check for HIS3 activation. HIS3 positives were then assayed for all 3 reporters. The pPC86 prey plasmid was isolated from all HIS3/URA3/LacZ positives and the cDNA insert sequenced. BLAST searches were performed to identify the cDNA insert [24].

Pairwise interactions

Specific interactions were tested by transforming competent MaV203 yeast cells with one bait construct (in pDBLeu) and one prey construct (in pPC86) and testing the resulting colonies for activation of the HIS3, URA3 and LacZ reporters as before.

To create a full-length Homer3 clone for pairwise tests, a cDNA clone (IMAGE clone 3602414, accession number BE569374) containing the missing N-terminal 70 amino acids was identified by a BLAST search of the EST nucleotide sequence database and obtained from the Rosalind Franklin Centre for Genomics Research. The missing fragment was amplified from the IMAGE clone by PCR and inserted into the pPC86-Homer3 plasmid to create a full-length expression construct.

Semi-quantitative PCR

To check the relative representation of clones in the cDNA library, semi-quantitative PCR was performed on Pax6, Homer3, Dncl1, Trim11 and the constitutively expressed genes Gapdh and Atp5a1 [29,30]. Primers were designed to cross at least one intron, so that only correctly spliced clones were amplified. Primer sequences were: Pax6-F CAG CCA AAA TAG ATC TAC CTG; Pax6-R CGA TCA CAT GCT CTC TCC TT; Homer3-F CCC AGG TGG CTG TAG AGC; Homer3-R CTC TAC ACA GTG CAA AGC TCA G; Trim11-F GTG CAG GAT GTG AAG CTG; Trim11-R GCC TGC AGA TAG TCA TAG GG; Dncl1-F CAA AAA TGC AGA CAT GTC G; Dncl1-R CTA AGG GAG AAA AAA ATG GGG; Gapdh-F: CAT CAC CAT CTT CCA GGA GC; Gapdh-R: ATG ACC TTG CCC ACA GCC TT; Atp5a1-F: CAC ACG TGA GAT GTC CTC CA; Atp5a1-R: CAC AGA GAT TCG GGG ATA A. 10 ng library cDNA were amplified in a reaction containing 1xAmpliTaq polymerase buffer (Perkin Elmer), 1.5 mM MgCl2, 200μM each primer and 2.5 units of AmpliTaq polymerase (Perkin Elmer). PCR conditions were (95°C for 30 sec) × 1, (94°C for 30 sec, 55°C for 30 sec, 72°C for 30 sec) × 32 and (72°C for 2 min) × 1. Products were resolved on a 2.5% agarose gel with ΦX174/HaeIII size markers (Promega).

Abbreviations

PST domain, proline-, serine- and threonine-rich domain; PSD, post-synaptic density; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.

Authors' contributions

STC carried out the bioinformatic analyses and all experimental work. IMH conceived, designed and supervised the study, and obtained funding. The manuscript was prepared jointly by STC and IMH, who have both read and approved the final version.

Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge Dr A Brown for technical advice on the yeast two-hybrid system and the Rosalind Franklin Centre for Genomics Research for supplying the Homer3 IMAGE clone. STC was supported by Fight for Sight and IMH was supported by a Career Development Award from the UK Medical Research Council.Fog2 Is Required for Normal Diaphragm and Lung Development in Mice and Humans

Abstract

Congenital diaphragmatic hernia and other congenital diaphragmatic defects are associated with significant mortality and morbidity in neonates; however, the molecular basis of these developmental anomalies is unknown. In an analysis of E18.5 embryos derived from mice treated with N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea, we identified a mutation that causes pulmonary hypoplasia and abnormal diaphragmatic development. Fog2 (Zfpm2) maps within the recombinant interval carrying the N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-induced mutation, and DNA sequencing of Fog2 identified a mutation in a splice donor site that generates an abnormal transcript encoding a truncated protein. Human autopsy cases with diaphragmatic defect and pulmonary hypoplasia were evaluated for mutations in FOG2. Sequence analysis revealed a de novo mutation resulting in a premature stop codon in a child who died on the first day of life secondary to severe bilateral pulmonary hypoplasia and an abnormally muscularized diaphragm. Using a phenotype-driven approach, we have established that Fog2 is required for normal diaphragm and lung development, a role that has not been previously appreciated. FOG2 is the first gene implicated in the pathogenesis of nonsyndromic human congenital diaphragmatic defects, and its necessity for pulmonary development validates the hypothesis that neonates with congenital diaphragmatic hernia may also have primary pulmonary developmental abnormalities.

Synopsis



Birth defects involving the diaphragm are as common and as serious as genetic disorders such as cystic fibrosis, yet the underlying causes of these defects are unknown. Most babies born with diaphragmatic defects have very small lungs, and many die in the newborn period with severe breathing difficulties. It is unknown whether the small lungs occur because these children have a diaphragmatic defect, or whether some patients might have a genetic abnormality that affects the development of both the lung and the diaphragm simultaneously.

In a screen of fetal mice carrying chemically induced genetic mutations, the authors found that a mutation in the gene Fog2 (Friend of gata 2), causes abnormal diaphragm development and small lungs. The lungs have a primary developmental abnormality that includes the specific loss of one lung lobe. Based on this result, the authors studied children affected with diaphragmatic abnormalities, and identified one human baby with a serious mutation in the human gene FOG2 who died at five hours of life with severe breathing difficulties, a diaphragmatic defect, and small lungs.

The authors have established that Fog2 is necessary for both diaphragm and lung development in mice and in humans. This is the first known cause of a nonsyndromic congenital diaphragmatic defect and establishes that some patients may have a primary developmental abnormality of both the lung and the diaphragm.

Introduction

Congenital diaphragmatic defects are a spectrum of relatively common birth defects. The Bochdalek or posterolateral hernias (often referred to as congenital diaphragmatic hernia [CDH]) occur in 1/3,000 live births [1], and although these are the most common type of diaphragmatic defect presenting at birth, diaphragmatic aplasia and diaphragmatic muscularization defects (eventrations) may have a similar clinical presentation.

Making specific anatomic distinctions among these types of defects can be difficult without direct gross (intraoperative or postmortem) examination. Pulmonary hypoplasia associated with these diaphragmatic defects causes severe mortality and morbidity. The pathogenesis and developmental relationship between diaphragmatic defects and pulmonary hypoplasia is not understood. Although advances in the medical management of pulmonary hypoplasia may have decreased the mortality associated with CDH patients who survive to receive care at high-volume centers [2,3], the population-based mortality has been reported to be as great as 62%, and there are a large number of deaths prior to birth or to transfer to a tertiary care facility [4]. As these patients commonly present with severe respiratory failure at birth, therapy has been centered around developing better methods to provide ventilatory support while not producing further lung injury. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is used in some centers to provide an extended period of cardiopulmonary bypass [5,6], while other centers have success using other ventilatory support techniques [7]. The morbidity in those who survive is high, and many patients survive with chronic respiratory insufficiency, cognitive and neuromotor deficits, and hearing loss as a result of necessary intensive interventions and associated structural and irreversible developmental abnormalities [8–11].

To date, there have been no specific mutations found to be associated with nonsyndromic diaphragmatic defects and pulmonary hypoplasia in humans. The heritability of these defects is unclear, as the high morbidity and mortality limit the collection of multigenerational families for analysis. The genetic etiologies are likely to be complex and probably arise from different mutations in various parts of the molecular developmental pathways required for diaphragmatic development. Indeed, there are numerous reports implicating different chromosomal abnormalities in the pathogenesis of CDH [12,13]. Given the difficulty of studying lethal developmental abnormalities in humans, it is of great potential utility to develop animal models of human birth defects, as the specific genetic abnormalities found in animal models can then be investigated in human populations.

We screened mice treated with the chemical mutagen N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU) for lines with developmental defects that present in the perinatal period [14]. From this screen, we identified a line of mice carrying a recessive mutation that results in primary pulmonary hypoplasia and abnormal diaphragmatic and cardiac development. Positional cloning analysis identified Fog2 (Zfpm2) as a likely candidate, and DNA sequencing revealed a mutation in a splice donor site that generates an abnormal transcript encoding a truncated protein. This result suggested that we examine the orthologous gene in humans with similar developmental defects, and we report the finding of a de novo nonsense mutation in FOG2 in a patient who died at birth with a diaphragmatic defect and severe pulmonary hypoplasia. This is the first reported mutation associated with these abnormalities in a human. We present additional data that provide direct evidence that pulmonary hypoplasia may be a primary component of this spectrum of disorders.

Results

Identification of the little lung Mutation in Fog2

We screened third-generation progeny of ENU-mutagenized mice at embryonic day 18.5 (E18.5) for abnormal developmental phenotypes [14]. One line of mice was found to have multiple embryos in independent litters that displayed pulmonary hypoplasia and a thin diaphragm. The mutation, which we called little lung (lil), was mapped to Chromosome 15 by utilizing a strategy of interval haplotype analysis (data not shown) [15]. For high-resolution mapping, F2 progeny from two crosses were analyzed. In 450 progeny of an intercross of F1 (A/J × FVB/N) lil/+ mice, the interval containing the mutation was defined by 19 recombinants between D15Mit220 and D15Mit154. Because of the lack of informative markers within this interval, an additional 39 F2 progeny from an A/J × C57BL/6J cross were tested. The identification of two recombinants established D15Mit85 as the proximal and D15Mit5 as the distal flanking markers.

The lil phenotype was identified at E18.5 to have bilateral pulmonary hypoplasia and an abnormal diaphragm. Pulmonary hypoplasia was apparent in all mutant mice that survived to birth. In a comparison between wild-type and mutant mice found dead on day one of life, body weights were not different; however, the lung weights were significantly lower in the mutant mice. The average mutant lung weight was 9.6 ± 2.5 mg while the average wild-type lung weight was 26.4 ± 4.6 mg (p < 0.001). All lungs from mutant mice were lacking an accessory lobe on the right side and had underdevelopment of the anterior right middle lobe (Figure 1A). Diaphragms from mutant lil mice were intact, but muscularization was absent in the dorsal regions. Myotubules were present in a limited and abnormal distribution. More specifically, myotubules normally radiate in a mediolateral fashion to meet the lateral body walls, with a normal paucity of muscle fibers in the central tendonous region. In the mutant diaphragm, myotubules radiated in a dorsal–ventral orientation, and muscle tissue did not meet the entire surface of the body walls (Figure 1B).

The number of lil mutant mice that survived to birth was less than 5% of total progeny, rather than the 25% expected for a recessive mutation. We evaluated litters at different embryonic time points to determine whether the reduced number was due to intra-uterine demise. Litters were collected at E12.5, 13.5, 15.5, 17.5, and 18.5, and embryos were genotyped and evaluated for evidence of intra-uterine demise, including growth retardation, pallor, and tissue friability. lil embryos had a progressively higher rate of demise between E13.5 and E15.5. At E12.5, 20 out of 87 (23%) were homozygous for the mutation, and all of these appeared viable. At E13.5, 13 of 49 (27%) were mutant and two had died. At E15.5, 22 out of 91 (24%) were mutant and the majority of mutant embryos (17 out of the 22) had died. By E18.5, nine of 29 embryos (31%) were homozygous for the mutation, of which only one embryo was viable. Diaphragmatic muscularization was abnormal in all mutant mice examined (n > 25). Pulmonary hypoplasia was observed in 100% of mutants evaluated for that phenotype between E11.5 and birth (n > 50).

Examination of cardiac morphology showed that hearts from E15.5 lil mutant mice had a variety of developmental defects, including enlarged and abnormally developed endocardial cushions, a double-outlet right ventricle, and a complete atrioventricular canal. The myocardium was also poorly developed, with thinning of the outer compact layer and decreased vascularity. The cohort of mutant mice that survived to birth also had cardiac malformations including atrioventricular-canal-type ventricular septal defects, ostium primum atrial septal defects, and enlarged atria (data not shown). All mutants specifically evaluated for a cardiac phenotype (n = 10) had abnormal cardiac development.

Examination of the 3-Mb region between D15Mit85 and D15Mit5 in DNA sequence databases revealed three predicted genes and four known genes, including Fog2. Targeted mutations of Fog2 have cardiac defects strikingly similar to those we identified in lil mutant mice, including atrioventricular canal defects, thinned myocardium, and absent coronary vasculature [16]. RT-PCR amplification of the proximal portion of Fog2 revealed longer transcripts in the lil mutant than in the wild-type embryos (Figure 2A). Sequencing of the mutant transcript revealed a point mutation (from thymine to cytosine) 2 bp after position 301, which is in the splice donor site at the end of the third exon. This mutation causes a splicing defect that results in the insertion of 85 bp of intronic sequence into the mutant transcript, and introduces a stop codon that generates a severely truncated protein product (Figure 2B). Heterozygous lil mutant mice were crossed with a Fog2+/− (null allele) mutant generated by gene targeting [16]. Doubly heterozygous mice had an embryonic lethal phenotype; this failure to complement proves that lil is a mutation in Fog2. The variable phenotype of lil mice (relative to that found for the Fog2 null mutant) is likely due to the generation of a low level of normal transcript despite the presence of the splice site mutation.

Lung and Diaphragm Development in the Fog2 Mutant Mouse

Experiments were conducted to evaluate the role of Fog2 in pulmonary and diaphragmatic development. The pulmonary phenotype is characterized by diffuse hypoplasia and specific loss of the accessory lobe and a portion of the right middle lobe.

It is well established that abnormalities in either diaphragmatic development or fetal breathing can result in a secondary pulmonary hypoplasia, although loss of normal structure has never been documented in this context [17,18]. Fog2 is expressed diffusely in the pulmonary mesenchyme during the period of branching morphogenesis, while later expression is restricted to the smooth muscles of airways and pulmonary vessels (Figure 3). This, and the observation that lungs appeared small on transverse sections evaluated prior to diaphragmatic muscularization or function, suggests that the pulmonary hypoplasia occurs independently of the diaphragmatic defect. To test this hypothesis, lungs were dissected from Fog2−/− mice and littermate controls before the onset of fetal diaphragmatic motion. Fog2−/− mice were used for this experiment, as we wanted to avoid potential phenotypic variance from the lil hypomorphic mutation. Lungs dissected at E12 from Fog2−/− embryos were smaller in size and lacked the development of an accessory lobe. In 11 viable Fog2−/− lung culture explants, there was never development of an accessory lobe, and the weights of mutant lungs cultured for 5 d were significantly lower than those of littermate controls (Figure 4). These data demonstrate that the pulmonary hypoplasia in Fog2 mutant mice is a primary defect.

Branching in the unaffected lobes appeared to be delayed by 6–12 h, but all mutants developed an intricate branching pattern in the unaffected lobes after culture for 5 d.

Because the Fog2 phenotype is striking for specific lobar loss, the spatial pattern of Fog2 expression was evaluated in normal embryos during the period of early lobar establishment to determine whether Fog2 expression is specifically different at these lobar buds. Expression was evaluated in mice carrying a lacZ gene incorporated into the Fog2 locus (S. Tevosian, unpublished data). In nine mice examined at E11.5, all lungs showed a specific enhancement of Fog2 expression in the mesenchyme surrounding the accessory bud and the right middle lobe bud, which are the lobes that do not develop normally in Fog2 mutant mice (Figure 5). By E12.5, expression was diffuse in the pulmonary mesenchyme, as was seen previously with in situ hybridization on tissue sections.

Diaphragms from Fog2 lil mice show an intact membrane with a defect in muscular patterning (see Figure 1B). The membranous portion of the diaphragm is populated by a migratory population of muscle precursor cells, much like the limbs [19,20]. Mice with defects in genes known to be important for the control of this process have intact but amuscular diaphragms [17,21,22]. Hepatocyte growth factor/Scatter factor (HGF) is one potential candidate responsible for the guidance of muscle precursors to the membranous diaphragm. It has been shown that HGF is expressed along this anatomic pathway [23], and mice with absence of the HGF receptor c-Met fail to form muscularized pleuroperitoneal folds (PPFs), and thus have amuscular diaphragms [24,25]. Fog2 is expressed diffusely in the early amuscular diaphragm at E11.5 as well as in the later muscularized diaphragm (see Figure 3C and 3D). Pax3 and MyoD, transcription factors required for appropriate migration and determination of myogenic precursors, were detected in the PPFs of Fog2 lil mice (data not shown). However, in situ expression analysis demonstrated that the expression of HGF in the region where this structure meets the membranous diaphragm was markedly reduced in Fog2 mutant mice (Figure 6). We hypothesize that Fog2 is required (either directly or indirectly) for the induction of HGF in the developing diaphragm, and dysregulation of HGF patterning along the path of muscle precursor cell migration between the PPF and the diaphragm accounts for the abnormal phenotype in these mice.

FOG2 Mutation in a Patient with Diaphragm and Lung Abnormalities

FOG2 sequence analysis was performed on autopsy tissue from 30 of 32 deceased children with an anatomic diagnosis of diaphragmatic defect evaluated at the Children's Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts, between 1993 and 2003. Autopsy reports were reviewed to determine the specific diagnoses. Of these 30 cases, 17 (57%) had Bochdalek CDH, two (7%) had diaphragmatic agenesis, seven (23%) had diaphragmatic eventration/muscularization defects (without Bochdalek CDH), and four (13%) had Bochdalek hernia of one hemidiaphragm and eventration of the other. Pulmonary hypoplasia was assessed using lung/body weight ratio and radial alveolar counts [26]. The material available for review included written reports and histologic slides in all cases and gross kodachromes in a subset of cases.

One child carried a highly significant FOG2 sequence change. The patient was a full-term 3,500-g baby girl who developed severe respiratory failure at birth and died after 5 h of resuscitation. Antemortem radiographs showed opacified lung fields and possible bowel in the chest. The patient's clinical diagnosis was CDH.

Review of autopsy material revealed severe bilateral pulmonary hypoplasia (combined lung weight, 11.1 g; expected for body length/weight, 46.8 ± 26.2 g; [27]), most markedly involving the left lung. The lung/body weight ratio was 0.0037 (expected > 0.010) [28]. There were a reduced number of bronchial generations, and the radial alveolar count was 2–3 (expected = 5) [29]. There were incomplete lung fissures bilaterally. A deep posterior diaphragmatic eventration was present on the left side. Additionally, two muscularized ligamentous bands resembling diaphragmatic remnants encircled the left lobe of the liver, creating an abnormal fissured liver contour. Away from the eventration, the diaphragm appeared well muscularized, measuring 0.3 cm in thickness. A complete autopsy revealed no other malformations; the heart was determined to be grossly normal and was donated for valve harvest.

Sequence analysis revealed a cytosine to thymine heterozygous change in exon 4 that changes the 112th amino acid from arginine to a stop codon. This mutation produces a severely truncated peptide that does not contain zinc finger domains (Figure 7). This base change was not present in the analysis of DNA from 400 normal adults. To assess the likelihood that the mutation was causal for the developmental phenotype, we examined both parents. Paternity was confirmed, and sequence analysis revealed that the neither parent carried this mutation, proving that the patient had a de novo mutation in FOG2 (Figure 7).

 Discussion

Congenital diaphragmatic defects are a heterogeneous group of disorders of unknown etiology. The defects that present in the pre- or perinatal period include Bochdalek hernia, diaphragmatic aplasia, and various degrees of muscularization defects or eventrations. Different types of defects occur in the same patients or in siblings, suggesting these represent variable expression of the same underlying pathogenesis [30,31]. Clinical differentiation between these defects may be very difficult, as the residual membranous diaphragm of a muscularization defect is thin and may not be easily visible on prenatal ultrasound or postnatal chest radiographs [32]. Although diaphragmatic muscularization defects were historically considered to be predictive of a good outcome, there have been inadequate population-based studies that include fetal or neonatal cases and autopsy diagnoses to make this conclusion definitive. In fact, the series of patients we report here and the published literature indicate that an eventration defect may be associated with displacement of abdominal contents and also with severe pulmonary hypoplasia and respiratory insufficiency [33,34].

Numerous chromosome abnormalities have been found in association with congenital diaphragm abnormalities [12,35]. Human FOG2 maps to Chromosome 8q23.1, and, importantly, several patients with diaphragm defects and rearrangements involving this locus have been reported. Specifically, there are three unrelated CDH patients with cytogenetically balanced translocations at or near the FOG2 locus [36,37]. Additionally, two patients with deletions apparently encompassing the FOG2 locus have died from multiple congenital anomalies including CDH [38–40]. Inactivation of this gene due to chromosomal rearrangement or deletion would result in a heterozygous null mutation similar to that found in the patient we report.

Because the FOG2 mutation we report is de novo and the phenotypes of the pulmonary and diaphragmatic defects are similar between mouse and human, we suggest that this mutation in FOG2 is the first reported cause of a human developmental diaphragmatic and pulmonary defect. In contrast to the affected child, mice heterozygous for a null mutation of Fog2 appear normal. However, there is ample precedent for the observation that haploinsufficiency of a gene with developmental functions is much less well tolerated in humans than mice [41].

It is unclear how the Fog2 diaphragmatic defect relates to the more common Bochdalek CDH, as the pathogenic mechanisms for both are largely unknown. Muscle precursors destined to populate the diaphragm migrate from the lateral dermomyotome of cervical somites. Prior to migration onto the diaphragm, they populate the PPF, a wedge-shaped tissue that tapers medially from the lateral body wall to the esophageal mesentery and fuses ventrally with the septum transversum [42]. Muscle precursors reach the PPF by E11, where they proliferate, differentiate, and then migrate toward the dorsolateral costal, sternal costal, and crural regions of the developing diaphragm. Thus, a defect in PPF formation subsequently results in the abnormal formation of the diaphragm [43]. We have shown that the Fog2 mutant does have an abnormal pattern of HGF expression in the region through which muscle precursor cells migrate onto the developing diaphragm. This finding may account for the abnormally patterned muscle that develops in the Fog2 mutant diaphragm. Although Pax3 and MyoD expression is detected in the PPF, a detailed analysis of transcription factors responsible for muscle precursor cell migration and differentiation will need to be completed both in the PPF and along the pathway of muscle precursor cell migration between the PPF and the membranous diaphragm. Fog2 can interact with any of the Gata factors, Gatas 1–6, as well as other transcription factors such as CoupTFII [44,45]. It is known that a Fog2–Gata4 interaction is critical for normal cardiac and gonadal development, but interacting factors in the lung and diaphragm have not yet been determined.

The severity of pulmonary hypoplasia in the patient we report was out of proportion to that of the diaphragm defect. Pulmonary hypoplasia is associated with abnormal diaphragmatic anatomy or function, and is known to occur as a secondary developmental defect in models of diaphragmatic dysfunction such as complete amuscularization [17] or phrenic nerve disruption [46]. It occurs in a surgical model of CDH in which a hernia is physically created in an in utero lamb [47,48]. However, the possibility that primary pulmonary developmental abnormalities occur with, rather than secondary to, diaphragmatic defects has been suggested by others based on a teratogenic model of CDH [49–51] and has long been suspected by clinicians who care for these patients. In addition, the high incidence of lobar abnormalities associated with CDH [52] supports the possibility that this disorder can be associated with a primary developmental pulmonary abnormality.

Our analysis of mice carrying mutations of Fog2 proves that there is a primary defect in lung development that results in specific loss of the accessory lobe and partial loss of the right middle lobe. The specific lobar defects prompted us to evaluate Fog2 expression at the time of early lobar budding. While Fog2 expression is diffuse in the pulmonary mesenchyme after lobar structure is well established (E12.5), it is more focally expressed in the mesenchyme surrounding the right middle lobe and accessory buds as these lobes form. This matches the phenotype of right middle lobe and accessory lobe loss, and suggests that Fog2 has a specific patterning role in establishment of these lobes. It is less clear whether loss of Fog2 results in a global branching defect, as Fog2 lungs appear to have a slight developmental delay, which could result from many causes. Cultured Fog2 lungs do develop an intricate branching pattern in the unaffected lobes that appears similar in the pattern to wild-type lungs after 5 d in culture.

In this report, we show that a mutation of Fog2 in the mouse causes the phenotype of abnormal diaphragmatic muscularization and primary pulmonary hypoplasia. We furthermore demonstrate that a mutation in this gene is associated with a lethal defect in lung and diaphragm development in a child. It is notable that, despite extensive analysis of Fog2 biology and the generation of a Fog2 knock-out mouse, its role in diaphragm and lung development was previously not recognized. It is only as a consequence of phenotype-driven analyses such as those we are pursuing that one has the opportunity to assay all of the potential molecular derangements that may result in human disease.

Materials and Methods



These investigations were conducted with approval of the institutional review board for Children's Hospital, Boston, and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston. Animal use was approved by the Center for Animal Resources and Comparative Medicine (Harvard Medical School).

Genetic mapping of the mouse mutation lil.

The lil mutation was identified as described in results. Wild-type FVB/N and C57BL/6J mice used for genetic crosses were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine, United States). Mice carrying a null mutation of Fog2 generated by gene targeting [16] were the generous gift of Dr. Stuart Orkin.

Developmental analysis of mice.

Timed pregnancies were set up for collection of E11.5–E17.5 embryos. Embryos were fixed, dehydrated, and embedded in paraffin prior to sectioning. In older embryos, a median sternotomy was performed under microscopic guidance, and diaphragm, lungs, and heart were examined. The lungs and tracheobronchial tree were removed and weighed. Whole diaphragms were isolated from fixed thoracic tissue from E15.5 and E17.5 embryos. For lung explant culture, lungs were dissected from fresh embryos at E11.5 and E12.5 and placed on porous 24-mm (0.4-μ) polyester membranes floated in wells containing 2 ml of Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium, nutrient mixture F-12 (11039–021, Gibco, San Diego, California, United States), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 0.3 mg/ml L-glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 mcg/ml streptomycin, and 0.25 mcg/ml amphotericin B. Lung explants were cultured at 37 °C in 95% air/5% CO2 for up to 5 d. They were photographed daily with a dissecting microscope (MZ12.5, Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) equipped with a Leica DC500 digital camera.

Transgenic mice carrying the lacZ gene driven by the Fog2 promoter have been developed by S. Tevosian. In these animals, the lacZ gene is incorporated (“knocked-in”) into the Fog2 locus to allow β-galactosidase expression as a fusion protein in frame with the first 235 amino acids of the FOG2 protein. The Fog2-lacZ module is followed by an ires-eGFP cassette. This creates a null allele of Fog2 gene. The Fog2-LacZ-eGFP construct was linearized with KspI and electroporated into the CJ7 ES cells. The correctly targeted clone was selected by the Southern blot analysis and injected into C57BL/6J blastocysts. Fog2-lacZ-eGFP animals were maintained on the mixed C57BL/6J/129 background. lacZ Expression in whole dissected embryonic lungs was analyzed by staining for β-galactosidase activity with X-gal after fixation for 30 min.

RT-PCR and sequence analysis in the mouse.

RNA was extracted by standard techniques from thoracic embryonic tissue. RT-PCR was performed using six primer sets designed to cover the Fog2 gene. RT-PCR was repeated with radiolabeled primers to amplify an abnormally spliced region of the gene (Table S1), and the product was run on a denaturing sequencing gel according to standard techniques. The RT-PCR product was cloned into pCR2.1 vector using TOPO TA Cloning Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, United States) and sequenced using gene-specific primers. Sequence analysis was done using Sequencher 4.1 (Gene Codes, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States).

In situ hybridization.

After dehydration and embedding in paraffin wax, 10-μ sections were subjected to radioactive in situ hybridization as described [53]. Probes labeled with 35S were prepared by run-off transcription of linearized plasmid templates and hybridized to tissue sections. Nuclei were counterstained with Hoescht 33258, and signal was imaged using fluorescent and darkfield microscopy.

Human DNA extraction and sequence analysis.

DNA was isolated from paraffin blocks by phenol-chloroform extraction [54,55], and from frozen tissues by standard techniques. Primers were designed to amplify FOG2 coding exons plus 50 bp of flanking upstream and downstream sequence. PCR amplification and sequencing were performed by standard methods. Primer sequences used are listed in Table S2. Sequence analysis was done with Sequencher 4.1 (Gene Codes).

DNA from the parents of one autopsy patient was extracted from fresh blood samples. A second set of blood samples was sent to an outside CLIA-certified laboratory for DNA extraction, PCR, sequencing, and analysis. Paternity testing was performed by the outside laboratory using a standard panel of markers. SNP genotyping was done using Harvard Partners Center for Genetics and Genomics genotyping core facility (Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States).

Supporting Information

Table S1

Primers for RT-PCR (Mouse): Amplification of Abnormal Transcript in Fog2 Mutant (lil) Mice

(26 KB DOC)

Click here for additional data file.

Table S2

Human Primers for Amplification of FOG2 Coding Sequence from Genomic DNA

(46 KB DOC)

Click here for additional data file.

Acknowledgements

This manuscript is dedicated to Baby Lucy and her parents for the contribution that they have made to helping us to understand developmental diaphragmatic and lung defects. This work was funded by National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NIHCD) grant HD36404 (DRB) and the Hearst Foundation (KGA). KGA also received salary support from NICHD grant T32HD040129–02. We would like to thank Stuart Orkin, M. D., for the generous gift of his Fog2−/− mice. We would also like to thank Raju Kucherlapati, Ph. D., and Birgit Funke, Ph. D., for providing control DNA samples.

Abbreviations

CDH - congenital diaphragmatic hernia

E[number] - embryonic day [number]

ENU - N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea

HGF - Hepatocyte growth factor/Scatter factor

lil - little lung

PPF - pleuroperitoneal fold

Figures

Figure 1

Abnormal Pulmonary and Diaphragmatic Development in the lil Mouse

(A) The mutant hypoplastic lung (right) lacks the development of the accessory lobe and the anterior portion of the right middle lobe (marked with arrows on the control sample on the left).

(B) Whole diaphragms show a lack of normal muscularization in the posterolateral regions and the peripheral regions of the mutant diaphragm (control on left and lil diaphragm on the right).

Figure 2

The ENU-Induced lil Mutation in Fog2 is a Splice Site Mutation

(A) RT-PCR revealed a lengthened transcript in mice with the lil phenotype: the first band is a lil mouse, and the second band is a control mouse.

(B) Sequencing Fog2 revealed a splice site mutation that causes the insertion of 85 bp of intronic sequence in the mutant mouse. This results in a premature stop codon prior to zinc finger transcription.

Figure 3

Fog2 Is Expressed in the Developing Lung and Diaphragm

Fog2 is expressed in the diffuse pulmonary mesenchyme at E13.5 (A) (arrow shows mesenchyme) and is restricted to the bronchial and vascular smooth muscle (sm) at E16.5 (B). Fog2 is expressed diffusely in the developing diaphragm (Dia) both prior to (E11.5) (C) and after muscularization (E13.5) (D).

Figure 4

Fog2 Is Necessary for Primary Lung Development

Fog2 null lungs removed prior to diaphragmatic muscularization and grown in vitro show no accessory lobe development. Accessory lobe is labeled with black arrow in control littermate lungs.

Figure 5

Fog2 Expression in Embryonic Non-Mutant Lungs

In embryonic non-mutant lungs, Fog2 is most highly expressed at the tips of the accessory (single arrows) and right middle lobes (double arrows) at E11.25 (A) and E11.75 (B), while expression is diffuse by E12.75 (C).

Figure 6

HGF Patterning Is Abnormal in Fog2 Null Mice

In situ hybridization of HGF in E12.5 wild-type (A) and Fog2−/− (B) embryos demonstrates decreased expression in the region where the PPF meets the membranous diaphragm. Li, liver; Lu, lung.

Figure 7

FOG2 Mutation in a Patient with Diaphragm and Lung Abnormalities

Sequencing revealed a de novo heterozygote nonsense mutation in a patient who died at birth with severe pulmonary hypoplasia and a posterior deep diaphragmatic eventration. She was clinically diagnosed with CDH. This nonsense mutation occurs prior to the functional zinc finger domains.

Footnotes

Competing interests. The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

Author contributions. KGA, JJG, and DRB conceived and designed the experiments. KGA, BJH, HH, SGT, LK, CR, RPB, and JAE performed the experiments. KGA, BJH, HH, LK, CR, JAE, JJG, and DRB analyzed the data. KGA, SOV, SGT, BRP, JAE, JJG, and DRB contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools. KGA and DRB wrote the paper.

Citation: Ackerman KG, Herron BJ, Vargas SO, Huang H, Tevosian SG, et al. (2005) Fog2 is required for normal diaphragm and lung development in mice and humans. PLoS Genet 1(1): e10.Inactivation of the Huntington's disease gene (Hdh) impairs anterior streak formation and early patterning of the mouse embryo

Abstract

Background

Huntingtin, the HD gene encoded protein mutated by polyglutamine expansion in Huntington's disease, is required in extraembryonic tissues for proper gastrulation, implicating its activities in nutrition or patterning of the developing embryo. To test these possibilities, we have used whole mount in situ hybridization to examine embryonic patterning and morphogenesis in homozygous Hdhex4/5 huntingtin deficient embryos.

Results

In the absence of huntingtin, expression of nutritive genes appears normal but E7.0–7.5 embryos exhibit a unique combination of patterning defects. Notable are a shortened primitive streak, absence of a proper node and diminished production of anterior streak derivatives. Reduced Wnt3a, Tbx6 and Dll1 expression signify decreased paraxial mesoderm and reduced Otx2 expression and lack of headfolds denote a failure of head development. In addition, genes initially broadly expressed are not properly restricted to the posterior, as evidenced by the ectopic expression of Nodal, Fgf8 and Gsc in the epiblast and T (Brachyury) and Evx1 in proximal mesoderm derivatives. Despite impaired posterior restriction and anterior streak deficits, overall anterior/posterior polarity is established. A single primitive streak forms and marker expression shows that the anterior epiblast and anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) are specified.

Conclusion

Huntingtin is essential in the early patterning of the embryo for formation of the anterior region of the primitive streak, and for down-regulation of a subset of dynamic growth and transcription factor genes. These findings provide fundamental starting points for identifying the novel cellular and molecular activities of huntingtin in the extraembryonic tissues that govern normal anterior streak development. This knowledge may prove to be important for understanding the mechanism by which the dominant polyglutamine expansion in huntingtin determines the loss of neurons in Huntington's disease.

Background

Huntington's disease (HD) is a dominantly inherited neurodegenerative disorder that is caused by CAG repeats in the HD locus that extend a polyglutamine tract in a ubiquitous HEAT domain protein called huntingtin [1]. The molecular mechanism by which the new property that is conferred on huntingtin by the polyglutamine expansion leads to the hallmark loss of striatal neurons in HD is not known. However, polyglutamine expansions in unrelated proteins that target distinct neuronal cell populations cause distinct 'polyglutamine' neurodegenerative disorders. This observation strongly suggests that the striatal cell specificity of the polyglutamine expansion in the context of huntingtin must be determined by some aspect of huntingtin's structure, subcellular location or activities [2].

Huntingtin is postulated to function as a flexible ~350 kDa HEAT domain scaffold that may facilitate the assembly and possibly the subcellular location of large protein complexes [3-7]. Huntingtin's large number of diverse cytoplasmic and nuclear protein binding partners strongly suggest that huntingtin may participate in a variety of cellular processes that range from trafficking of growth factor complexes to gene transcription (reviewed in [5,8,9]. However, despite the potential importance of huntingtin's normal function to our understanding of how the dominant polyglutamine mutation causes HD pathology, huntingtin's precise molecular and cellular activities have not been defined.

Therefore, we, and others, set out to discover huntingtin's essential activities by studying the effects of huntingtin deficiency in the mouse. Inactivation of the mouse HD gene (Hdh) has shown that huntingtin is not required for cell viability, as evidenced by the survival of mouse embryonic stem cells and neurons that lack huntingtin [10-12]. However, huntingtin is needed at the level of the organism for proper mammalian embryonic development [10,13,14]. Complete lack of huntingtin results in developmental arrest during gastrulation, while severe reduction of huntingtin levels results in abnormal neurogenesis and perinatal lethality [15].

Analysis of huntingtin deficient Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos reveals that homozygous inactivation of the mouse HD gene does not overtly affect development until E7.0. By E7.5, mutant embryos exhibit a shortened primitive streak, reduced size and, by morphology, lack a node and head folds. Mutants are rapidly resorbed by E8.0 [10]. Importantly, the expression of huntingtin only in extraembryonic tissues in chimeras rescues this gastrulation phenotype, suggesting that huntingtin is required only in cells of the extraembryonic lineage and acts in a cell non-autonomous manner at this stage [16].

Extraembryonic tissues are essential for supplying nutrients and signals that direct anterior/posterior axis formation and patterning in the developing embryo (reviewed in [17]), implicating huntingtin in either or both of these processes. Of these possibilities, the nutritive role has been more extensively investigated. However, huntingtin deficient embryos do not display obvious visceral endoderm defects, with the notable exception of compromised iron transport in later stage mutants, although iron uptake is undisturbed [16] and endocytosis is not impaired in huntingtin deficient embryos or embryonic stem cells [16,18].

By the same token, huntingtin shuttles through the nucleus, where it is required for proper nuclear localization of its transcription factor partners, suggesting that huntingtin may play a role in transcription cascades in extraembryonic tissues that pattern the embryo [18]. Therefore, we have examined this hypothesis, by monitoring the expression of genes that determine normal embryonic patterning and morphogenesis in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 huntingtin deficient embryos. Our results support and refine the hypothesis, indicating that huntingtin is required for proper mesoderm patterning and for normal regional restriction of the expression of a subset of growth and transcription factors.

Results

Huntingtin-deficient embryos exhibit abnormal streak progression and paraxial mesoderm production

Since extraembryonic tissues supply nutrients to the developing embryo, we tested the possibility that huntingtin deficiency may perturb this function by performing RT-PCR analysis to examine the expression of a panel of 'nutritive' genes in E7.5 wild-type and Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 huntingtin deficient embryos. Consistent with a previous report [16], no obvious differences were found in the expression of "nutritive" genes (Hnf4, Afp, Tfn, ApoAI, Apo-AIV, and ApoB) or genes involved in yolk sac hematopoiesis or vasculogenesis (Ttr, Rbp, Flt1, Flk1, Tal1, Rbtn2, GATA1) (data not shown), suggesting that huntingtin is not essential for the proper expression of genes required for the nutritive function of the extraembryonic tissues.

To investigate huntingtin's developmental activities, we then analyzed the expression of genes which pattern the early embryo or mark morphogenic landmarks in wild-type and Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos by whole mount and section in situ hybridization. The dissections confirmed previous morphologic data at E7.0–7.5 that all Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 homozygotes exhibit abnormal morphology, including shortened primitive streak and a lack of morphological head folds or node [10,13]. The results of in situ hybridization analysis also confirmed that all three germ layers and extraembryonic tissue are formed in huntingtin deficient embryos.

Otx2, normally expressed in the anterior neuroectoderm and anterior visceral endoderm [19], is expressed in mutant embryos at E7.5 (Fig. 1A,B) although the expression domain appears reduced. Similarly, Hesx1 expression is grossly normal in mutant embryos, with expression localized to the AVE and neuroectoderm (Fig. 1C–F, [20]), although the expression domain also appears reduced. These results indicate appropriate specification and movement of anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) cells from the distal tip and suggest that neuroectoderm is induced in the mutant embryos.

Figure 1

AVE displacement and anterior neurectoderm induction occur normally in the absence of huntingtin. Whole mount in situ hybridization analysis of Otx2 (A,B) and Hesx (C-F) in E7.5 normal (A,C,E) and mutant (B,D,F) embryos reveals that neuroectoderm and anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) develop normally in huntingtin deficient embryos, although the neuroectoderm expression domain is reduced. Asymmetrical expression of Hesx in mutant embryos (F) suggests that left-right transcriptional control is maintained. Hnf3β expression in the definitive endoderm extends around the distal tip and is reduced in the AVE (*) in both normal (G,I) and mutant embryos (H,J). Taken together, these results suggest normal ectoderm and endoderm induction and localization in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos. Embryos are shown in lateral views, with anterior to the left in all pictures with the exception of E and F. Embryos are viewed from the anterior aspect in E and F.

To examine definitive endoderm formation, the expression of Hnf3β (FoxA2) in mutant and wild-type embryos was analyzed. In wild-type embryos, Hnf3β expression is confined to the node and anterior definitive endoderm (Fig. 1G,I[21]). Mutant embryos exhibit Hnf3β-reactive definitive endoderm over the disorganized anterior streak region and proceeding rostrally around the distal tip (Fig. 1H,J). In both normal and mutant embryos, the AVE exhibits little Hnf3β expression. Therefore, huntingtin deficiency does not greatly affect Hnf3β regulation or the reorganization of the visceral endoderm.

The lack of a morphological node and presence of a shortened streak, together with reduced neuroectoderm and lack of headfolds, suggest that anterior streak formation may be impaired in huntingtin deficient embryos. To investigate this possibility, we examined mesoderm formation in mutant embryos. Mesoderm is specified in the mutant embryos, as marked by the expression of T (Brachyury) and Evx1 (Fig. 2A–F). However, close inspection of the data reveals abnormal patterning within this tissue and its derivatives.T, normally expressed in the primitive streak, node and axial head process/notochord mesoderm [22], is detected in the shortened streak and axial mesoderm in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos, extending rostrally from a region of weakly positive cells (Fig. 2A,B). T expression appears weaker, however, in the anterior streak, corresponding to cells that will give rise to axial mesoderm (Fig. 2D). T is also ectopically expressed in mutant extraembryonic mesoderm at the anterior embryonic junction and along the chorion (Fig. 2B,D). Similarly, Evx1, normally expressed in primitive streak mesoderm at E7.5 with highest levels in proximal cells [23], is expressed in the proximal shortened streak but is also aberrantly expressed throughout the extraembryonic mesoderm, allantois and chorion (Fig. 2E,F). Extraembryonic mesoderm, derived from the proximal streak, does not normally express T or Evx1 in wild-type embryos [22]. Therefore, the inappropriate expression of T and Evx1, the shortened primitive streak, and the absence of a morphological node, all suggest that the anterior primitive streak is deficient in the mutant embryos.

Figure 2

Huntingtin is required for formation of anterior primitive streak and paraxial mesoderm. Whole mount and section insitu hybridizations of E7.5 embryos shows T (Brachyury) (A-D) is expressed in the primitive streak, node, axial mesoderm and Evx1 (E-F) is expressed in the primitive streak, most strongly in the proximal streak wild-type embryos. However, in mutant embryos, both T (B, D) and Evx1 (F) are ectopically expressed in the extraembryonic region. Wnt3A expression is reduced in mutant embryos (H), although the localization of its expression to the proximal streak is the same as in wild-type embryos (G). Analysis of paraxial mesoderm markers Tbx6 (I,J) and Dll1 (K,L), reveals that these markers are reduced in mutant embryos (J,L), suggesting impaired paraxial mesoderm production in the absence of huntingtin. Embryos in A-H are shown in a lateral view with anterior oriented to the left. Embryos in I-L are shown in a posterior view (I,K) or near posterior (J,L) view with proximal oriented toward the top. In (C,D), al = allantois, a = amnion, ch = chorion, ee = embryonic node(N), em = extraembryonic mesoderm, n = node, ps = primitive streak. Rather than a node, mutant embryos exhibit a region of disorganized cells (*) at the distal extent of the short primitive streak.

The anterior streak generates paraxial mesoderm. Therefore we examined paraxial mesoderm formation in wild-type and mutant embryos, revealing deficits in mesoderm patterning. Starting at E.7.5, Wnt3A is expressed in the primitive streak in cells fated to become paraxial mesoderm. In huntingtin deficient mutants, Wnt3a is induced in the proximal streak (Fig. 2G,H), confirming stage appropriate posterior development, in contrast to the absence of anterior head folds. However, expression of Wnt3a is noticeably reduced in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos, suggesting a defect in paraxial mesoderm development (Fig. 2H). Reduced expression of Tbx6 in the mesoderm lateral to the primitive streak in mutant embryos confirms this interpretation (Fig. 2I,J). Furthermore, in mutant embryos at E7.5, the expression of Dll1 in the distal streak region and in only a narrow swath of cells located laterally confirms the paucity of paraxial mesoderm (Fig. 2K,L, [24]). These results strongly suggest that anterior primitive streak formation is impaired, resulting in reduced axial and paraxial mesoderm formation and impaired neural development.

Impaired regional restriction of growth factor expression in the absence of huntingtin

To elucidate the apparent patterning deficits, we next analyzed signaling molecules that are required for early patterning. Nodal, a member of the Tgfβ family of secreted molecules is required for the formation and maintenance of the primitive streak and induction of the AVE [25-27]. Nodal is normally expressed throughout the epiblast and overlying visceral endoderm at early post implantation stages [28], but later becomes restricted to the posterior of the embryo to the site of primitive streak with asymmetrical visceral endoderm expression marking the left-right axis. By E7.5, Nodal expression is restricted to the node. Nodal expression was assessed in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos heterozygous for the Ndl lac Z allele [28,29]. Notably, heterozygous loss of nodal does not alter the Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 phenotype, as determined by morphology of Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5:Ndllacz/Ndl+ embryos compared with Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos (data not shown). In contrast to wild-type embryos, which exhibit tight restriction of Nodal.LacZ expression to the node, Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5:Ndllacz/Ndl+ embryos express Nodal.LacZ throughout the endoderm overlying the epiblast, with higher levels in the posterior in an asymmetric pattern (Fig. 3A–D). The lack of tight restriction of nodal signal is consistent with a failure to form an organized node structure.

Figure 3

Impaired regional restriction of gene expression in huntingtin deficient embryos. X-gal staining of Nodal-LacZ embryos shows staining in endoderm near the node of normal embryos (A,C) but broad staining in mutant embryos (B, D), although expression is higher in the posterior. The tight node expression of Nodal in normal embryos (C) is lost in mutant embryos (D), consistent with the loss of a morphological node in the absence of huntingtin. Whole mount and in situ hybridization of E7.5 day embryos reveals that Fgf8 is detected in the proximal streak and is downregulated in cells migrating out of the streak in normal embryos (E,G). In contrast, Fgf8 remains highly expressed in mutant embryos (F,H). Transient expression of Gsc in the definitive endoderm overlying the prospective head region in normal embryos (I,K) is distinguished in other cell layers in normal embryos but remains unrestricted in mutant embryos (J,L). Earlier posterior expression of Gsc is also maintained in mutant embryos (J) while it is down-regulated in normal embryos (I). Embryos (A,B,E,F,G,H,I,K,L) are shown in a lateral view with anterior oriented to the left. Embryos (C,D) are in a posterior view.

Fgf8 signaling is also essential for normal gastrulation in the mouse embryo. Fgf8 is required for cell migration away from the primitive streak [30]. Expressed just prior to streak formation in the posterior epiblast and visceral endoderm, Fgf8 is restricted to the streak mesoderm at E7.5 in a decreasing proximal-distal gradient and is downregulated in cells shortly after they exit the streak (Fig. 3E,G). In Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos, Fgf8 expression is strongly expressed in the posterior region in the primitive streak and ectopically in the endoderm overlying the entire epiblast (Fig. 3F,H). However, streak derivatives appear to migrate normally as evidenced by the proper anterior expression of markers such as Otx2, Hnf3β and Hesx1 anteriorly (Fig. 1). Therefore, mutant embryos exhibit normal migration of streak derivatives but display impaired Fgf8 repression in mutant endoderm.

Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos also fail to restrict the expression of goosecoid (Gsc). Normally, Gsc is initially expressed in the visceral endoderm and proximal, posterior streak where the primitive streak will form prior to gastrulation. As the primitive streak forms and extends, Gsc is expressed in the distal streak, the node, and the axial mesoderm extending anteriorly from the node (Fig. 3I,K, [31,32]). However, in the mutant Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos, high levels of Gsc expression remain unrestricted in the endoderm overlying the entire embryo and ectopically in cells adjacent to the ectoplacental cone (Fig. 3J,L). These results suggest that, in contrast to proper Hnf3β regulation, Gsc remains inappropriately activated in mutant visceral and definitive endoderm, implicating huntingtin in the proper restriction of this homeodomain transcription factor.

Huntingtin is not required for expression of extraembryonic signaling molecules

Previous studies of chimeric embryos suggest that huntingtin is required only in the extraembryonic tissue for proper development [16]. Signals from the extraembryonic tissue are critical for the induction of embryonic signals and for patterning the epiblast. Consequently, we examined extraembryonic development in huntingtin deficient embryos. Hnf4 is a transcription factor expressed in the primitive endoderm as soon as this tissue becomes distinct and is a key regulator of visceral endoderm secreted factors such as alphafetoprotein, apolipoproteins, and transferrin. Inactivation of Hnf4 results in impaired gastrulation [33,34]. At E7.5, Hnf4 is expressed in the columnar visceral endoderm cells at the extraembryonic-ectoderm junction (Fig. 4A, [33]). In Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos, consistent with normal primitive and visceral endoderm differentiation, Hnf4 expression appears normal, although the signal is stronger in mutant embryos compared to wild-type embryos (Fig. 4B). Similarly, Pem, a transcription factor expressed in proximal visceral endoderm and ectoplacental cone in wild-type embryos at E7.5, also is expressed in these tissues in the mutant embryos (Fig. 4C,D[35]). However, Pem expressing visceral endoderm hangs over the anterior of the mutant embryos, revealing abnormal location despite grossly normal differentiation.

Figure 4

Normal expression of extraembryonic markers in huntingtin deficient embryos. Whole mount in situ hybridization analysis at E7.5 of markers of the extraembryonic tissues reveals grossly normal expression in the absence of huntingtin. Hnf4, expressed in the visceral endoderm at the junction of embryonic-ectoderm junction (A), is normal in mutant embryos, although the signal is slightly higher (B). Similarly, the expression of Pem transcripts is maintained in mutant embryos (D) similar to normal embryos (C), although Pem is expressed in the abnormal lopsided overhang of visceral endoderm over the anterior of the mutant embryos. Expression of extraembryonic signaling molecules is unaffected by the loss of huntingtin, as evidenced by the expression of Bmp4 (E,F) in the extraembryonic ectoderm, and Lefty1 and Dkk1 (I-L) in the AVE in mutant embryos. Bmp4 is not localized, however, to a ring of extraembryonic ectoderm in mutant embryos (F) as in normal embryos (E). Primitive germ cells (PCGs) are induced normally in both wild-type (G) and mutant embryos (H), suggesting the Bmp4 signaling from the extraembryonic ectoderm to the epiblast is normal. Lefty1 expression appears disorganized in mutant embryos (I) compared to wild-type embryos (J). In contrast, the anterior expression of Dkk1 in the AVE in mutant embryos (L) matches the wild-type expression pattern (K). Despite normal AVE formation, head folds fail to form in mutant embryos, even when cultured in nutrient rich media for 24 hours. Wild-type E7.5 embryos, when cultured in 75% rat serum, develop somites (M), heart (white arrow, N) and head folds (blue arrow head, N) in culture. In contrast, huntingtin deficient embryos continue to live in culture but do not form headfolds, heart or somites (O). Embryos are shown in a lateral view (A-F, I-J) with anterior oriented to the left. Embryos in (G,H,K,L) are shown in an anterior view with proximal oriented up.

Signals from the extraembryonic tissues, including the anterior visceral endoderm and extraembryonic ectoderm are required for proper formation and patterning of the epiblast [17]. Bmp4 is a signaling molecule that is first expressed uniformly throughout the extraembryonic ectoderm and subsequently is localized to a ring of extraembryonic ectoderm adjacent to the epiblast (Fig. 4E, [36]). A key factor in regulating the formation of the node and primitive streak, Bmp4 is required for patterning the embryo along the proximodistal axis [37-40]. In the absence of huntingtin, Bmp4 expression is properly maintained in the Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 extraembryonic ectoderm but is also expressed throughout the extraembryonic ectoderm (Fig. 4F) in a pattern that is similar to early Bmp4 expression rather than being restricted to a ring of extraembryonic ectoderm as seen in the wild-type embryos To assess Bmp4 signaling from the extraembryonic ectoderm, we evaluated primordial germ cells (PGCs), which require Bmp4 for their induction [37]. PGCs can first be detected at E7.0 and subsequently underlie the posterior portion of the primitive streak. Whole mount staining of E7.5 mutant and wild-type embryos for alkaline phosphatase activity reveals that PCGs form in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos, suggesting that Bmp4 signaling is functional in the absence of huntingtin (Fig. 4G,H).

The anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) is also an extraembryonic source of signals that are critical for early patterning. Wnt and nodal antagonists, Dkk1 (mdkk-1) and Lefty1 respectively, are expressed in the AVE and are important in limiting the posteriorization of the anterior embryo by restricting Nodal and Wnt signaling [41-43]. In Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos, both Dkk1 (Fig. 4I,J) and Lefty1 (Fig. 4K,L) are expressed normally in the AVE as compared with wild-type embryos. However, Dkk-1 levels appear to be slightly increased in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos, although the pattern of Dkk-1 expression remains unchanged and this increase may just reflect the same amount of expression in a smaller area. Therefore, the ectopic expression of Nodal (Fig. 3A–D) and the decreased Wnt3a expression (Fig. 2H) in mutant embryos do not appear to be result of changes in the expression pattern of Lefty1 or Dkk1.

Despite normal AVE formation and neuroectoderm induction, head folds do not form in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos. Therefore, to determine whether mutant embryos are inherently capable of forming head folds, embryos harvested at stage E7.5 were allowed to progress in rich culture medium in vitro for 24 hours. Wild-type embryos continued to develop head folds, somites and hearts (Fig. 4M,N). In contrast, mutant stage 7.5 embryos did not develop headfolds, hearts or somites, although these embryos continued to live (Fig. 4O). These results strongly suggest that in the absence of huntingtin, embryos are unable to undergo organogenesis, even if they continue to live past E7.5 in a nutrient rich environment.

Discussion

We have investigated the embryonic processes that require huntingtin in order to more precisely delineate huntingtin's essential molecular and cellular activities and to provide clues to the mechanism by which the dominant polyglutamine expansion mutation in huntingtin leads to HD pathogenesis. In pursuing the finding that huntingtin is needed only in extraembryonic tissues for normal gastrulation, our data fail to provide evidence of abnormal nutritive gene expression in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos. Instead, our results reveal that huntingtin is required for normal anterior streak formation and the consequent production of paraxial mesoderm, with a previously unrecognized role for huntingtin in the proper extinction of transiently and/or dynamically expressed genes.

Indeed, the hallmark of the huntingtin deficient molecular phenotype is the impaired down-regulation of a subset of dynamically expressed genes, after the proper onset of expression. This phenomenon does not reflect a lack of anterior/posterior axis formation, as evidenced by the formation of the AVE anteriorly and the primitive streak posteriorly. Nor can it be simply explained by delayed development, as stage-specific markers, such as Wnt3a and primordial germ cells, which are detectable at E7.0 in wild-type embryos, are induced appropriately. Furthermore, the expression of T and Evx1 in the extraembryonic mesoderm of mutant embryos is not a feature of wild-type embryos, even at earlier stages. This strongly suggests that in huntingtin deficient embryos, the migration of the distal streak derivatives to the extraembryonic mesoderm occurs normally but that the down-regulation of these genes is impaired. This impairment may also explain the failure of huntingtin deficient embryos to properly restrict the expression of Fgf8, Nodal and Gsc. Thus, huntingtin may play a direct role in the transcriptional regulation, or mRNA stability of these genes or it may act indirectly by intersecting with other pathways that regulate the expression of these genes.

The requirement for huntingtin in the extraembryonic tissues had prompted us to test whether impaired extraembryonic signals might be responsible for the dysregulation of gene expression within the epiblast that is observed in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos. Extraembryonic development in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos is associated with mildly elevated levels expression of Hnf4 in the primitive endoderm and Pem in the lopsided anterior chorion but the expression of other known signals, such as Bmp4 from the extraembryonic ectoderm, and Dkk1 and Lefty1 from the AVE, appear to be normal, although the slight increase in Dkk-1 expression in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos suggests that further investigation into Wnt signaling is warranted. Moreover, extraembryonic Bmp4 signaling is not impaired in the absence of huntingtin, as the induction of PCGs in mutant embryos is normal, implying proper transport and secretion of the appropriate extraembryonic signals. However, Nodal, Fgf8 and Gsc are expressed ectopically in the visceral endoderm of Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos. Both Nodal and Fgf8, important growth factors required for normal development of the epiblast, are tightly regulated during gastrulation. Therefore, misexpression of either or both of these factors, or of goosecoid, in the visceral endoderm could contribute to the Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 mutant phenotype. In addition, it is possible that other extraembryonic signal(s) that we have not analyzed may also be affected by the lack of huntingtin activity in extraembryonic cells in mutant embryos.

Huntingtin deficient embryos also fail to form headfolds, and to undergo organogenesis, even after culturing in nutrient rich media. The absence of headfold formation in these embryos does not appear to be a result of a failure to induce neurectoderm or a failure to form the AVE, since mutant embryos express markers such as Otx2, Ddk1, Lefty1 and Hesx1. In addition, since node formation is not required for neural induction [44-46], the failure to form a node in huntingtin deficient embryos is also unlikely to explain the lack of headfolds. The apparent reduction of paraxial mesoderm in Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos could explain the lack of headfolds since paraxial mesoderm is important for the full development of neuroectoderm, and consequently, headfolds. Alternatively, the inability to manifest headfolds could suggest that huntingtin is required at a very early stage for normal CNS development. This conclusion is consistent with the finding that severely reduced levels of huntingtin, from a hypomorphic Hdh allele, lead to abnormal brains later in embryonic development [15].

The cardinal features of complete Hdh inactivation that we observe are similar to the phenotypes that stem from the complete inactivation of the Polycomb group gene (Pc-g) Eed (embryonic ectoderm development). Indeed, complete deficiency for either huntingtin or the eed protein leads to abnormal streak development, lack of headfold formation, ectopic T, Evx1 and Nodal expression and disruption of anterior primitive streak mesoderm production [47]. Interestingly, Eed protein is also required for proper trophoblast development and normal maintenance of imprinted X-inactivation and genomic imprinting [47-49], suggesting that these activities warrant investigation in huntingtin deficient embryos.

Thus, our observations provide unexpected starting-points in the search for huntingtin's precise molecular activities, which began with the discovery that this HEAT domain protein hosts the dominant polyglutamine property that is the fundamental basis of HD pathogenesis. In HD patients and in accurate genetic replicas, HD CAG knock-in mice, the dominant mutation specifically affects the major population of neurons in the striatum, without impairing huntingtin's essential activities in embryonic development [50-53]. Indeed, homozygous HD patients make no wild-type huntingtin, and, in the mouse, a single mutant Hdh allele's worth of mutant huntingtin can fully rescue huntingtin deficiency embryonic phenotypes [15,51]. The quest to understand the HD mechanism, therefore, is aimed at delineating the huntingtin activity that may explain the striatal cell specificity of the polyglutamine mutant version of huntingtin. One hypothesis is that huntingtin is normally involved in gene transcription, as proposed for NRSF/REST mediated BDNF expression [54]. Now, our finding that huntingtin can be absolutely necessary for the appropriate regulation of genes with dynamic expression patterns in vivo, provides a compelling reason to elucidate the cellular machinery that is necessary for huntingtin mediated gene regulation.

Conclusion

Our findings indicate that huntingtin is required for proper patterning of the epiblast during early embryogenesis, for proper anterior streak and node formation, primitive streak progression, paraxial mesoderm and head fold formation, as well as for the proper restriction of transiently expressed growth and transcription factor genes. Knowledge of the molecular basis of these changes in huntingtin deficient embryos should facilitate the identification of the cellular pathways that are dependent on huntingtin activities. These will be important for implicating candidates to be assessed in the extraembryonic signals that determine anterior streak progression in the developing embryo and in delineating the dominant activity of the polyglutamine tract in huntingtin that determines the striatal specificity of HD.

Methods

Mice and genotyping

The Hdhex4/5 mice carrying a pGKneo insertion/replacement inactivating mutation in the mouse HD gene homologue have been described previously [10]. The experiments were conducted in accordance with an IACUC approved protocol, through the MGH Subcommittee on Animal Research. Mutant Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 and normal littermates were obtained in timed pregnancies from mating of Hdhex4/5/Hdh+ heterozygotes, genotyped by PCR assay, as described [10]. The day of plug was taken to be E0.5. Embryos that were morphologically normal were pooled separately from morphologically mutant embryos for analysis. Nodal expression was determined in embryos from matings of Hdhex4/5/Hdh+; NdllacZ/Ndl+ compound heterozygotes genotyped by PCR assay as described in [29].

Whole mount and section in situ hybridization and β-gal staining

After dissection in PBS, embryos were fixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C. For sections, decidua fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, were embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 7 microns. RNA in situ hybridizations were performed as described previously [55]. Nodal.lacZ expression was assessed by β-galactosidase staining as reported [29], on embryos post fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde. Embryos were mounted in 80% glycerol before being photographed.

The huntingtin deficient phenotype is fully penetrant at each of the stages that were assessed [10]. Three to six embryos were evaluated for each marker, with every embryo exhibiting the same mutant phenotype in each case.

Alkaline phosphatase staining of Primordial Germ Cells (PCGs)

After dissections, embryos were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde briefly and washed and stored in 1 × PBS/0.1% TX-100 at 4°C. Embryos were washed once with Tris-Maleate Buffer (25 mM Tris-Maleate, pH = 9.0, 0.8 mM MgCl2) and were subsequently incubated in alkaline phosphatase staining solution (25 mM Tris-Maleate, pH = 9.0, 0.8 mM MgCl2, 0.4 mg/ml alpha-naphthyl phosphate, 1 mg/ml Fast-Red). Stained embryos were washed in 1 × PBS/0.1% TX-100.

Whole embryo culture

Embryos were dissected at E7.5 and washed in DMEM. Embryos were then cultured individually in 1 ml of culture media (75% immediately centrifuged rat serum and 25% DMEM [56]) for 24 hours while rotating in a 37°C incubator in 5% CO2. Embryos were then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for analysis.

Abbreviations

AVE, anterior visceral endoderm; HD, Huntington's disease gene; HD, Huntington's disease; Hdh, mouse HD gene homologue; PCGs, primordial germ cells

Authors' contributions

JMW, TC, PH-M and MD performed whole mount and in situ hybridization assays. MEM and RC contributed to the conception of this study. JMW, TC, PH-M and MEM drafted the manuscript and RC contributed to its finalization. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Drs. A. Gossler, J. Darnell, Jr., J Rossant, G. Keller, S. Orkin, G. Martin, T. Yamaguchi, A. McMahon, R. Maas, K., Muneoka, A. Simeone, Hamada H. and C. Niehrs for the generous gifts of clones and antibody reagents and Dr. E. Robertson for NdllacZ mice. We would like to thank Kathy Molyneaux for her helpful suggestions and technical assistance. We also thank Vladimir Vrbanac, Janice Espinola and Edith Toral Lopez for assistance with animal husbandry. We also thank the members of the MacDonald lab for helpful discussions during the completion of this work. This work was supported by the NINDS grants NS32765 and NS16367, and grants from the Foundation for the Care and Cure of Huntington's disease and with the support of the Huntington's Disease Society of America Coalition for the Cure and the Hereditary Disease Foundation. Juliana M. Woda is the recipient of the Milton Wexler Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Hereditary Disease Foundation.